could pick up some firsthand knowledge of the mess, and then pass it over to people who know 
a little more about this interstellar intrigue. I'm no storybook spy." 

"You're not behind me, Bay." He folded his arms and frowned. "What a situation! You'd never 
know there was a person like the Mule, except for this last queer break. Do you suppose he'll 
come for his clown?" 

Bayta looked up at him. "I don't know that I want him to. I don't know what to say or do. Do 
you?" 

The inner buzzer sounded with its intermittent burring noise. Bayta's lips moved wordlessly, 
"The Mule!" 

Magnifico was in the doorway, eyes wide, his voice a whimper, "The Mule?" 

Toran murmured, "I've got to let them in." 

A contact opened the air lock and the outer door closed behind the newcomer. The scanner 
showed only a single shadowed figure. 

"It's only one person," said Toran, with open relief, and his voice was almost shaky as he bent 
toward the signal tube, "Who are you?" 

"You'd better let me in and find out, hadn't you?" The words came thinly out the receiver. 

"I'll inform you that this is a Foundation ship and consequently Foundation territory by 
international treaty." 



"I know that." 

"Come with your arms free, or I'll shoot. I'm well-armed." 

"Done!" 

Toran opened the inner door and closed contact on his blast pistol, thumb hovering over the 
pressure point. There was the sound of footsteps and then the door swung open, and Magnifico 
cried out, "It's not the Mule. It's but a man." 

The "man" bowed to the clown somberly, "Very accurate. I'm not the Mule." He held his hands 
apart, "I'm not armed, and I come on a peaceful errand. You might relax and put the blast pistol 
away. Your hand isn't steady enough for my peace of mind." 

"Who are you?" asked Toran, brusquely. 

"I might ask you that," said the stranger, coolly, "since you're the one under false pretenses, not 
I." 

"How so?" 

"You're the one who claims to be a Foundation citizen when there's not an authorized Trader 
on the planet." 

"That's not so. How would you know?" 

"Because I am a Foundation citizen, and have my papers to prove it. Where are yours?" 

"I think you'd better get out." 

"I think not. If you know anything about Foundation methods, and despite your imposture you 
might, you'd know that if I don't return alive to my ship at a specified time, there'll be a signal at 
the nearest Foundation headquarters so I doubt if your weapons will have much effect, 
practically speaking." 

There was an irresolute silence and then Bayta said, calmly, "Put the blaster away, Toran, and 
take him at face value. He sounds like the real thing." 

"Thank you," said the stranger. 

Toran put his gun on the chair beside him, "Suppose you explain all this now." 

The stranger remained standing. He was long of bone and large of limb. His face consisted of 
hard flat planes and it was somehow evident that he never smiled. But his eyes lacked 
hardness. 

He said, "News travels quickly, especially when it is apparently beyond belief. I don't suppose 
there's a person on Kalgan who doesn't know that the Mule's men were kicked in the teeth 
today by two tourists from the Foundation. I knew of the important details before evening, and, 
as I said, there are no Foundation tourists aside from myself on the planet. We know about 
those things." 



Who are the 'we'? 


"'We' are - 'we'! Myself for one! I knew you were at the Hangar - you had been overheard to 
say so. I had my ways of checking the registry, and my ways of finding the ship." 

He turned to Bayta suddenly, "You're from the Foundation - by birth, aren't you?" 

"Am I?" 

"You're a member of the democratic opposition - they call it 'the underground.' I don't 
remember your name, but I do the face. You got out only recently - and wouldn't have if you 
were more important." 

Bayta shrugged, "You know a lot." 

"I do. You escaped with a man. That one?" 

"Does it matter what I say?" 

"No. I merely want a thorough mutual understanding. I believe that the password during the 
week you left so hastily was 'Seldon, Hardin, and Freedom.' Porfirat Hart was your section 
leader. " 

"Where'd you get that?" Bayta was suddenly fierce. "Did the police get him?" Toran held her 
back, but she shook herself loose and advanced. 

The man from the Foundation said quietly, "Nobody has him. It's just that the underground 
spreads widely and in queer places. I'm Captain Han Pritcher of Information, and I'm a section 
leader myself - never mind under what name." 

He waited, then said, "No, you don't have to believe me. In our business it is better to overdo 
suspicion than the opposite. But I'd better get past the preliminaries." 

"Yes," said Toran, "suppose you do." 

"May I sit down? Thanks." Captain Pritcher swung a long leg across his knee and let an arm 
swing loose over the back of the chair. "I'll start out by saying that I don't know what all this is 
about - from your angle. You two aren't from the Foundation, but it's not a hard guess that 
you're from one of the independent Trading worlds. That doesn't bother me overmuch. But out 
of curiosity, what do you want with that fellow, that clown you snatched to safety? You're risking 
your life to hold on to him." 

"I can't tell you that." 

"Hm-m-m. Well, I didn't think you would. But if you're waiting for the Mule himself to come 
behind a fanfarade of horns, drums, and electric organs - relax! The Mule doesn't work that 
way." 

"What?" It came from both Toran and Bayta, and in the comer where Magnifico lurked with ears 
almost visibly expanded, there was a sudden joyful start. 

"That's right. I've been trying to contact him myself, and doing a rather more thorough job of it 



than you two amateurs can. It won't work. The man makes no personal appearance, does not 
allow himself to be photographed or simulated, and is seen only by his most intimate 
associates." 

"Is that supposed to explain your interest in us, captain?" questioned Toran. 

"No. That clown is the key. That clown is one of the very few that have seen him. I want him. 

He may be the proof I need - and I need something, Galaxy knows - to awaken the 
Foundation." 

"It needs awakening?" broke in Bayta with sudden sharpness. "Against what? And in what role 
do you act as alarm, that of rebel democrat or of secret police and provocateur?" 

The captain's face set in its hard lines. "When the entire Foundation is threatened, Madame 
Revolutionary, both democrats and tyrants perish. Let us save the tyrants from a greater, that 
we may overthrow them in their turn." 

"Who's the greater tyrant you speak of?" flared Bayta. 

"The Mule! I know a bit about him, enough to have been my death several times over already, if 
I had moved less nimbly. Send the clown out of the room. This will require privacy." 

"Magnifico," said Bayta, with a gesture, and the clown left without a sound. 

The captain's voice was grave and intense, and low enough so that Toran and Bayta drew 
close. 

He said, "The Mule is a shrewd operator - far too shrewd not to realize the advantage of the 
magnetism and glamour of personal leadership. If he gives that up, it's for a reason. That 
reason must be the fact that personal contact would reveal something that is of overwhelming 
importance not to reveal." 

He waved aside questions, and continued more quickly, "I went back to his birthplace for this, 
and questioned people who for their knowledge will not live long. Few enough are still alive. 
They remember the baby born thirty years before - the death of his mother - his strange youth. 
The Mule is not a human being!" 

And his two listeners drew back in horror at the misty implications. Neither understood, fully or 
clearly, but the menace of the phrase was definite. 

The captain continued, "He is a mutant, and obviously from his subsequent career, a highly 
successful one. I don't know his powers or the exact extent to which he is what our thrillers 
would call a 'superman,' but the rise from nothing to the conqueror of Kalgan's warlord in two 
years is revealing. You see, don't you, the danger? Can a genetic accident of unpredictable 
biological properties be taken into account in the Seldon plan?" 

Slowly, Bayta spoke, "I don't believe it. This is some sort of complicated trickery. Why didn't the 
Mule's men kill us when they could have, if he's a superman?" 

"I told you that I don't know the extent of his mutation. He may not be ready, yet, for the 
Foundation, and it would be a sign of the greatest wisdom to resist provocation until ready. Now 



let me speak to the clown." 

The captain faced the trembling Magnifico, who obviously distrusted this huge, hard man who 
faced him. 

The captain began slowly, "Have you seen the Mule with your own eyes?" 

"I have but too well, respected sir. And felt the weight of his arm with my own body as well." 

"I have no doubt of that. Can you describe him?" 

"It is frightening to recall him, respected sir. He is a man of mighty frame. Against him, even you 
would be but a spindling. His hair is of a burning crimson, and with all my strength and weight I 
could not pull down his arm, once extended - not a hair's thickness." Magnifico's thinness 
seemed to collapse upon itself in a huddle of arms and legs. "Often, to amuse his generals or to 
amuse only himself, he would suspend me by one finger in my belt from a fearful height, while I 
chattered poetry. It was only after the twentieth verse that I was withdrawn, and each 
improvised and each a perfect rhyme, or else start over. He is a man of overpowering might, 
respected sir, and cruel in the use of his power - and his eyes, respected sir, no one sees." 

"What? What's that last?" 

"He wears spectacles, respected sir, of a curious nature. It is said that they are opaque and that 
he sees by a powerful magic that far transcends human powers. I have heard," and his voice 
was small and mysterious, "that to see his eyes is to see death; that he kills with his eyes, 
respected sir." 

Magnifico's eyes wheeled quickly from one watching face to another. He quavered, "It is true. 

As I live, it is true. " 

Bayta drew a long breath, "Sounds like you're right, captain. Do you want to take over?" 

"Well, let's look at the situation. You don't owe anything here? The hangar's barrier above is 
free?" 

"I can leave any time." 

"Then leave. The Mule may not wish to antagonize the Foundation, but he runs a frightful risk in 
letting Magnifico get away. It probably accounts for the hue and cry after the poor devil in the 
first place. So there may be ships waiting for you upstairs. If you're lost in space, who's to pin 
the crime?" 

"You're right," agreed Toran, bleakly. 

"However, you've got a shield and you're probably speedier than anything they've got, so as 
soon as you're clear of the atmosphere make the circle in neutral to the other hemisphere, then 
just cut a track outwards at top acceleration." 

"Yes," said Bayta coldly, "and when we are back on the Foundation, what then, captain?" 

"Why, you are then co-operative citizens of Kalgan, are you not? I know nothing to the contrary, 
do I?" 



Nothing was said. Toran turned to the controls. There was an imperceptible lurch. 

It was when Toran had left Kalgan sufficiently far in the rear to attempt his first interstellar jump, 
that Captain Pritcher's face first creased slightly - for no ship of the Mule had in any way 
attempted to bar their leaving. 

"Looks like he's letting us carry off Magnifico," said Toran. "Not so good for your story." 

"Unless," corrected the captain, "he wants us to carry him off, in which case it's not so good for 
the Foundation." 

It was after the last jump, when within neutral-flight distance of the Foundation, that the first 
hyperwave news broadcast reached the ship. 

And there was one news item barely mentioned. It seemed that a warlord - unidentified by the 
bored speaker - had made representations to the Foundation concerning the forceful abduction 
of a member of his court. The announcer went on to the sports news. 

Captain Pritcher said icily, "He's one step ahead of us after all." Thoughtfully, he added, "He's 
ready for the Foundation, and he uses this as an excuse for action. It makes things more 
difficult for us. We will have to act before we are really ready." 


15. THE PSYCHOLOGIST 

There was reason to the fact that the element known as "pure science" was the freest form of 
life on the Foundation. In a Galaxy where the predominance - and even survival - of the 
Foundation still rested upon the superiority of its technology - even despite its large access of 
physical power in the last century and a half - a certain immunity adhered to The Scientist. He 
was needed, and he knew it. 

Likewise, there was reason to the fact that Ebling Mis - only those who did not know him added 
his titles to his name - was the freest form of life in the "pure science" of the Foundation. In a 
world where science was respected, he was The Scientist - with capital letters and no smile. 

He was needed, and he knew it. 

And so it happened, that when others bent their knee, he refused and added loudly that his 
ancestors in their time bowed no knee to any stinking mayor. And in his ancestors' time the 
mayor was elected anyhow, and kicked out at will, and that the only people that inherited 
anything by right of birth were the congenital idiots. 

So it also happened, that when Ebling Mis decided to allow Indbur to honor him with an 
audience, he did not wait for the usual rigid line of command to pass his request up and the 
favored reply down, but, having thrown the less disreputable of his two formal jackets over his 
shoulders and pounded an odd hat of impossible design on one side of his head, and lit a 
forbidden cigar into the bargain, he barged past two ineffectually bleating guards and into the 
mayor's palace. 

The first notice his excellence received of the intrusion was when from his garden he heard the 



gradually nearing uproar of expostulation and the answering bull-roar of inarticulate swearing. 

Slowly, Indbur lay down his trowel; slowly, he stood up; and slowly, he frowned. For Indbur 
allowed himself a daily vacation from work, and for two hours in the early afternoon, weather 
permitting, he was in his garden. There in his garden, the blooms grew in squares and 
triangles, interlaced in a severe order of red and yellow, with little dashes of violet at the apices, 
and greenery bordering the whole in rigid lines. There in his garden no one disturbed him - no 
one! 

Indbur peeled off his soil-stained gloves as he advanced toward the little garden door. 

Inevitably, he said, "What is the meaning of this?" 

It is the precise question and the precise wording thereof that has been put to the atmosphere 
on such occasions by an incredible variety of men since humanity was invented. It is not 
recorded that it has ever been asked for any purpose other than dignified effect. 

But the answer was literal this time, for Mis's body came plunging through with a bellow, and a 
shake of a fist at the ones who were still holding tatters of his cloak. 

Indbur motioned them away with a solemn, displeased frown, and Mis bent to pick up his ruin of 
a hat, shake about a quarter of the gathered dirt off it, thrust it under his armpit and say: 

"Look here, Indbur, those unprintable minions of yours will be charged for one good cloak. Lots 
of good wear left in this cloak." He puffed and wiped his forehead with just a trace of 
theatricality. 

The mayor stood stiff with displeasure, and said haughtily from the peak of his five-foot-two, "It 
has not been brought to my attention, Mis, that you have requested an audience. You have 
certainly not been assigned one." 

Ebling Mis looked down at his mayor with what was apparently shocked disbelief, "Ga-LAX-y, 
Indbur, didn't you get my note yesterday? I handed it to a flunky in purple uniform day before. I 
would have handed it to you direct, but I know how you like formality." 

"Formality!" Indbur turned up exasperated eyes. Then, strenuously, "Have you ever heard of 
proper organization? At all future times you are to submit your request for an audience, 
properly made out in triplicate, at the government office intended for the purpose. You are then 
to wait until the ordinary course of events brings you notification of the time of audience to be 
granted. You are then to appear, properly clothed - properly clothed, do you understand - and 
with proper respect, too. You may leave." 

"What's wrong with my clothes?" demanded Mis, hotly. "Best cloak I had till those unprintable 
fiends got their claws on it. I'll leave just as soon as I deliver what I came to deliver. "Ga-LAX-y, 
if it didn't involve a Seldon Crisis, I would leave right now." 

"Seldon crisis!" Indbur exhibited first interest. Mis was a great psychologist - a democrat, boor, 
and rebel certainly, but a psychologist, too. In his uncertainty, the mayor even failed to put into 
words the inner pang that stabbed suddenly when Mis plucked a casual bloom, held it to his 
nostrils expectantly, then flipped it away with a wrinkled nose. 



Indbur said coldly, "Would you follow me? This garden wasn't made for serious conversation." 

He felt better in his built-up chair behind his large desk from which he could look down on the 
few hairs that quite ineffectually hid Mis's pink scalp-skin. He felt much better when Mis cast a 
series of automatic glances about him for a non-existent chair and then remained standing in 
uneasy shifting fashion. He felt best of all when in response to a careful pressure of the correct 
contact, a liveried underling scurried in, bowed his way to the desk, and laid thereon a bulky, 
metal-bound volume. 

"Now, in order," said Indbur, once more master of the situation, "to make this unauthorized 
interview as short as possible, make your statement in the fewest possible words." 

Ebling Mis said unhurriedly, "You know what I'm doing these days?" 

"I have your reports here," replied the mayor, with satisfaction, "together with authorized 
summaries of them. As I understand it, your investigations into the mathematics of 
psychohistory have been intended to duplicate Hari Seldon's work and, eventually, trace the 
projected course of future history, for the use of the Foundation." 

"Exactly," said Mis, dryly. "When Seldon first established the Foundation, he was wise enough 
to include no psychologists among the scientists placed here - so that the Foundation has 
always worked blindly along the course of historical necessity. In the course of my researches, I 
have based a good deal upon hints found at the Time Vault." 

"I am aware of that, Mis. It is a waste of time to repeat." 

"I'm not repeating," blared Mis, "because what I'm going to tell you isn't in any of those reports." 

"How do you mean, not in the reports?" said Indbur, stupidly. "How could-" 

"Ga-LAX-y, Let me tell this my own way, you offensive little creature. Stop putting words into 
my mouth and questioning my every statement or I'll tramp out of here and let everything 
crumble around you. Remember, you unprintable fool, the Foundation will come through 
because it must, but if I walk out of here now - you won't." 

Dashing his hat on the floor, so that clods of earth scattered, he sprang up the stairs of the dais 
on which the wide desk stood and shoving papers violently, sat down upon a comer of it. 

Indbur thought frantically of summoning the guard, or using the built-in blasters of his desk. But 
Mis's face was glaring down upon him and there was nothing to do but cringe the best face 
upon it. 

"Dr. Mis," he began, with weak formality, "you must-" 

"Shut up," said Mis, ferociously, "and listen. If this thing here," and his palm came down heavily 
on the metal of the bound data, "is a mess of my reports - throw it out. Any report I write goes 
up through some twenty-odd officials, gets to you, and then sort of winds down through twenty 
more. That's fine if there's nothing you don't want kept secret. Well, I've got something 
confidential here. It's so confidential, even the boys working for me haven't got wind of it. They 
did the work, of course, but each just a little unconnected piece - and I put it together. You 



know what the Time Vault is? 


Indbur nodded his head, but Mis went on with loud enjoyment of the situation, "Well, I'll tell you 
anyhow because I've been sort of imagining this unprintable situation for a "Ga-LAX-y, of a long 
time; I can read your mind, you puny fraud. You've got your hand right near a little knob that'll 
call in about five hundred or so armed men to finish me off, but you're afraid of what I know - 
you're afraid of a Seldon Crisis. Besides which, if you touch anything on your desk, I'll knock 
your unprintable head off before anyone gets here. You and your bandit father and pirate 
grandfather have been blood-sucking the Foundation long enough anyway." 

"This is treason," gabbled Indbur. 

"It certainly is," gloated Mis, "but what are you going to do about it? Let me tell you about the 
Time Vault. That Time Vault is what Hari Seldon placed here at the beginning to help us over 
the rough spots. For every crisis, Seldon has prepared a personal simulacrum to help - and 
explain. Four crises so far - four appearances. The first time he appeared at the height of the 
first crisis. The second time, he appeared at the moment just after the successful evolution of 
the second crisis. Our ancestors were there to listen to him both times. At the third and fourth 
crises, he was ignored - probably because he was not needed, but recent investigations -not 
included in those reports you have - indicate that he appeared anyway, and at the proper 
times. Get it?" 

Fie did not wait for any answer. His cigar, a tattered, dead ruin was finally disposed of, a new 
cigar groped for, and lit. The smoke puffed out violently. 

Fie said, "Officially I've been trying to rebuild the science of psychohistory. Well, no one man is 
going to do that, and it won't get done in any one century, either. But I've made advances in the 
more simple elements and I've been able to use it as an excuse to meddle with the Time Vault. 
What I have done, involves the determination, to a pretty fair kind of certainty, of the exact date 
of the next appearance of Hari Seldon. I can give you the exact day, in other words, that the 
coming Seldon Crisis, the fifth, will reach its climax. " 

"Flow far off?" demanded Indbur, tensely. 

And Mis exploded his bomb with cheerful nonchalance, 

"Four months," he said. "Four unprintable months, less two days." 

"Four months," said Indbur, with uncharacteristic vehemence. "Impossible." 

"Impossible, my unprintable eye." 

"Four months? Do you understand what that means? For a crisis to come to a head in four 
months would mean that it has been preparing for years." 

"And why not? Is there a law of Nature that requires the process to mature in the full light of 
day?" 

"But nothing impends. Nothing hangs over us." Indbur almost wrung his hands for anxiety. With 
a sudden spasmodic recrudescence of ferocity, he screamed, "Will you get off my desk and let 



me put it in order? How do you expect me to think?" 

Mis, startled, lifted heavily and moved aside. 

Indbur replaced objects in their appropriate niches with a feverish motion. He was speaking 
quickly, "You have no right to come here like this. If you had presented your theory-" 

"It is not a theory. " 

"I say it is a theory. If you had presented it together with your evidence and arguments, in 
appropriate fashion, it would have gone to the Bureau of Historical Sciences. There it could 
have been properly treated, the resulting analyses submitted to me, and then, of course, proper 
action would have been taken. As it is, you've vexed me to no purpose. Ah, here it is." 

He had a sheet of transparent, silvery paper in his hand which he shook at the bulbous 
psychologist beside him. 

"This is a short summary I prepare myself - weekly - of foreign matters in progress. Listen - 
we have completed negotiations for a commercial treaty with Mores, continue negotiations for 
one with Lyonesse, sent a delegation to some celebration or other on Bonde, received some 
complaint or other from Kalgan and we've promised to look into it, protested some sharp trade 
practices in Asperta and they've promised to look into it - and so on and so on." The mayor's 
eyes swarmed down the list of coded notations, and then he carefully placed the sheet in its 
proper place in the proper folder in the proper pigeonhole. 

I tell you, Mis, there's not a thing there that breathes anything but order and peace-" 

The door at the far, long end opened, and, in far too dramatically coincident a fashion to 
suggest anything but real life, a plainly-costumed notable stepped in. 

Indbur half-rose. He had the curiously swirling sensation of unreality that comes upon those 
days when too much happens. After Mis's intrusion and wild turnings there now came the 
equally improper, hence disturbing, intrusion unannounced, of his secretary, who at least knew 
the rules. 

The secretary kneeled low. 

Indbur said, sharply, "Well!" 

The secretary addressed the floor, "Excellence, Captain Han Pritcher of Information, returning 
from Kalgan, in disobedience to your orders, has according to prior instructions - your order 
X20-513 - been imprisoned, and awaits execution. Those accompanying him are being held for 
questioning. A full report has been filed." 

Indbur, in agony, said, "A full report has been received. Well!" 

"Excellence, Captain Pritcher has reported, vaguely, dangerous designs on the part of the new 
warlord of Kalgan. He has been given, according to prior instructions - your order X20-651 - no 
formal hearing, but his remarks have been recorded and a full report filed." 


Indbur screamed, "A full report has been received. Well!" 



"Excellence, reports have within the quarter-hour been received from the Salinnian frontier. 
Ships identified as Kalganian have been entering Foundation territory, unauthorized. The ships 
are armed. Fighting has occurred." 

The secretary was bent nearly double. Indbur remained standing. Ebling Mis shook himself, 
clumped up to the secretary, and tapped him sharply on the shoulder. 

"Flere, you'd better have them release this Captain Pritcher, and have him sent here. Get out." 

The secretary left, and Mis turned to the mayor, "Fladn't you better get the machinery moving, 
Indbur? Four months, you know." 

Indbur remained standing, glaze-eyed. Only one finger seemed alive - and it traced rapid jerky 
triangles on the smooth desk top before him. 


16. CONFERENCE 

When the twenty-seven independent Trading worlds, united only by their distrust of the mother 
planet of the Foundation, concert an assembly among themselves, and each is big with a pride 
grown of its smallness, hardened by its own insularity and embittered by eternal danger - there 
are preliminary negotiations to be overcome of a pettiness sufficiently staggering to heartsicken 
the most persevering. 

It is not enough to fix in advance such details as methods of voting, type of representation - 
whether by world or by population. These are matters of involved political importance. It is not 
enough to fix matters of priority at the table, both council and dinner, those are matters of 
involved social importance. 

It was the place of meeting - since that was a matter of overpowering provincialism. And in the 
end the devious routes of diplomacy led to the world of Radole, which some commentators had 
suggested at the start for logical reason of central position. 

Radole was a small world - and, in military potential, perhaps the weakest of the twenty-seven. 
That, by the way, was another factor in the logic of the choice. 

It was a ribbon world - of which the Galaxy boasts sufficient, but among which, the inhabited 
variety is a rarity for the physical requirements are difficult to meet. It was a world, in other 
words, where the two halves face the monotonous extremes of heat and cold, while the region 
of possible life is the girdling ribbon of the twilight zone. 

Such a world invariably sounds uninviting to those who have not tried it, but there exist spots, 
strategically placed - and Radole City was located in such a one. 

It spread along the soft slopes of the foothills before the hacked-out mountains that backed it 
along the rim of the cold hemisphere and held off the frightful ice. The warm, dry air of the 
sun-half spilled over, and from the mountains was piped the water-and between the two, 

Radole City became a continuous garden, swimming in the eternal morning of an eternal June. 



Each house nestled among its flower garden, open to the fangless elements. Each garden was 
a horticultural forcing ground, where luxury plants grew in fantastic patterns for the sake of the 
foreign exchange they brought - until Radole had almost become a producing world, rather 
than a typical Trading world. 

So, in its way, Radole City was a little point of softness and luxury on a horrible planet - a tiny 
scrap of Eden - and that, too, was a factor in the logic of the choice. 

The strangers came from each of the twenty-six other Trading worlds: delegates, wives, 
secretaries, newsmen, ships, and crews - and Radole's population nearly doubled and 
Radole's resources strained themselves to the limit. One ate at will, and drank at will, and slept 
not at all. 

Yet there were few among the roisterers who were not intensely aware that all that volume of 
the Galaxy burnt slowly in a sort of quiet, slumbrous war. And of those who were aware, there 
were dime classes. First, there were the many who knew little and were very confident. 

Such as the young space pilot who wore the Haven cockade on the clasp of his cap, and who 
managed, in holding his glass before his eyes, to catch those of the faintly smiling Radolian girl 
opposite. He was saying: 

"We came fight through the war-zone to get here-on purpose. We traveled about a light-minute 
or so, in neutral, right past Horleggor-" 

"Horleggor?" broke in a long-legged native, who was playing host to that particular gathering. 
"That's where the Mule got the guts beat out of him last week, wasn't it?" 

"Where'd you hear that the Mule got the guts beat out of him?" demanded the pilot, loftily. 

"Foundation radio." 

"Yeah? Well, the Mule's got Horleggor. We almost ran into a convoy of his ships, and that's 
where they were coming from. It isn't a gut-beating when you stay where you fought, and the 
gut-beater leaves in a hurry." 

Someone else said in a high, blurred voice, "Don't talk like that. Foundation always takes it on 
the chin for a while. You watch; just sit tight and watch. 01' Foundation knows when to come 
back. And then - pow T The thick voice concluded and was succeeded by a bleary grin. 

"Anyway." said the pilot from Haven, after a short pause, "As I say, we saw the Mule's ships, 
and they looked pretty good, pretty good. I tell you what - they looked new." 

"New?" said the native, thoughtfully. "They build them themselves?" He broke a leaf from an 
overhanging branch, sniffed delicately at it, then crunched it between his teeth, the bruised 
tissues bleeding greenly and diffusing a minty odor. He said, "You trying to tell me they beat 
Foundation ships with homebuilt jobs? Go on." 

"We saw them, doc. And I can tell a ship from a comet, too, you know." 

The native leaned close. "You know what I think. Listen, don't kid yourself. Wars don't just start 
by themselves, and we have a bunch of shrewd apples running things. They know what they're 



doing." 

The well-unthirsted one said with sudden loudness, "You watch ol' Foundation. They wait for 
the last minute, then - powf' He grinned with vacuously open mouth at the girl, who moved 
away from him. 

The Radolian was saying, "For instance, old man, you think maybe that this Mule guy's running 
things. No-o-o." And he wagged a finger horizontally. "The way I hear it, and from pretty high 
up, mind you, he's our boy. We're paying him off, and we probably built those ships. Let's be 
realistic about it - we probably did. Sure, he can't beat the Foundation in the long run, but he 
can get them shaky, and when he does - we get in." 

The girl said, "Is that all you can talk about, Kiev? The war? You make me tired." 

The pilot from Haven said, in an access of gallantry, 

"Change the subject. Can't make the girls tired." 

The bedewed one took up the refrain and banged a mug to the rhythm. The little groups of two 
that had formed broke up with giggles and swagger, and a few similar groups of twos emerged 
from the sun-house in the background. 

The conversation became more general, more varied, more meaningless. 

Then there were those who knew a little more and were less confident. 

Such as the one-armed Fran, whose large bulk represented Haven as official delegated, and 
who lived high in consequence, and cultivated new friendships - with women when he could 
and with men when he had to. 

It was on the sun platform of the hilltop home, of one of these new friends, that he relaxed for 
the first of what eventually proved to be a total of two times while on Radole. The new friend 
was Iwo Lyon, a kindred soul of Radole. Iwo's house was apart from the general cluster, 
apparently alone in a sea of floral perfume and insect chatter. The sun platform was a grassy 
strip of lawn set at a forty-five degree angle, and upon it Fran stretched out and fairly sopped 
up sun. 

He said, "Don't have anything like this on Haven." 

Iwo replied, sleepily, "Ever seen the cold side. There's a spot twenty miles from here where the 
oxygen runs like water. " 

"Go on. 

"Fact." 

"Well, I'll tell you, Iwo-ln the old days before my arm was chewed off I knocked around, see - 
and you won't believe this, but" - The story that followed lasted considerably, and Iwo didn't 
believe it. 


Iwo said, through yawns, "They don't make them like in the old days, that's the truth. 



"No, guess they don't. Well, now," Fran fired up, "don't say that. I told you about my son, didn't 
I? He's one of the old school, if you like. He'll make a great Trader, blast it. He's his old man up 
and down. Up and down, except that he gets married." 

"You mean legal contract? With a girl?" 

"That's right. Don't see the sense in it myself. They went to Kalgan for their honeymoon." 
"Kalgan? Kalgan? When the Galaxy was this?" 

Fran smiled broadly, and said with slow meaning, "Just before the Mule declared war on the 
Foundation." 

"That so?" 

Fran nodded and motioned Iwo closer with his head. He said, hoarsely, "In fact, I can tell you 
something, if you don't let it go any further. My boy was sent to Kalgan for a purpose. Now I 
wouldn't like to let it out, you know, just what the purpose was, naturally, but you look at the 
situation now, and I suppose you can make a pretty good guess. In any case, my boy was the 
man for the job. We Traders needed some sort of ruckus." He smiled, craftily. "It's here. I'm not 
saying how we did it, but - my boy went to Kalgan, and the Mule sent out his ships. My son!" 

Iwo was duly impressed. He grew confidential in his turn, "That's good. You know, they say 
we've got five hundred ships ready to pitch in on our own at the right time. " 

Fran said authoritatively, "More than that, maybe. This is real strategy. This is the kind I like." 
He clawed loudly at the skin of his abdomen. "But don't you forget that the Mule is a smart boy, 
too. What happened at Horleggor worries me." 

"I heard he lost about ten ships." 

"Sure, but he had a hundred more, and the Foundation had to get out. It's all to the good to 
have those tyrants beaten, but not as quickly as all that." He shook his head. 

"The question I ask is where does the Mule get his ships? There's a widespread rumor we're 
making them for him." 

"We? The Traders? Haven has the biggest ship factories anywhere in the independent worlds, 
and we haven't made one for anyone but ourselves. Do you suppose any world is building a 
fleet for the Mule on its own, without taking the precaution of united action? That's a ... a fairy 
tale." 

"Well, where does he get them?" 

And Fran shrugged, "Makes them himself, I suppose. That worries me, too." 

Fran blinked at the sun and curled his toes about the smooth wood of the polished foot-rest. 
Slowly, he fell asleep and the soft burr of his breathing mingled with the insect sibilance. 

Lastly, there were the very few who knew considerable and were not confident at all. 

Such as Randu, who on the fifth day of the all-Trader convention entered the Central Hall and 



found the two men he had asked to be there, waiting for him. The five hundred seats were 
empty - and were going to stay so. 

Randu said quickly, almost before he sat down, "We three represent about half the military 
potential of the Independent Trading Worlds." 

"Yes," said Mangin of Iss, "my colleague and I have already commented upon the fact." 

"I am ready," said Randu, "to speak quickly and earnestly. I am not interested in bargaining or 
subtlety. Our position is radically in the worse." 

"As a result of-" urged Ovall Gri of Mnemon. 

"Of developments of the last hour. Please! From the beginning. First, our position is not of our 
doing, and but doubtfully of our control. Our original dealings were not with the Mule, but with 
several others; notably the ex-warlord of Kalgan, whom the Mule defeated at a most 
inconvenient time for us." 

"Yes, but this Mule is a worthy substitute," said Mangin. "I do not cavil at details." 

"You may when you know all the details." Randu leaned forward and placed his hands upon the 
table palms-up in an obvious gesture. 

Fie said, "A month ago I sent my nephew and my nephew's wife to Kalgan." 

"Your nephew!" cried Ovall Gri, in surprise. "I did not know he was your nephew." 

"With what purpose," asked Mangin, dryly. "This?" And his thumb drew an inclusive circle high 
in the air. 

"No. If you mean the Mule's war on the Foundation, no. Flow could I aim so high? The young 
man knew nothing - neither of our organization nor of our aims. Fie was told I was a minor 
member of an intra-Flaven patriotic society, and his function at Kalgan was nothing but that of 
an amateur observer. My motives were, I must admit, rather obscure. Mainly, I was curious 
about the Mule. Fie is a strange phenomenon - but that's a chewed cud; I'll not go into it. 
Secondly, it would make an interesting and educational training project for a man who had 
experience with the Foundation and the Foundation underground and showed promise of future 
usefulness to us. You see-" 

Ovall's long face fell into vertical lines as he showed his large teeth, "You must have been 
surprised at the outcome, then, since there is not a world among the Traders, I believe, that 
does not know that this nephew of yours abducted a Mule underling in the name of the 
Foundation and furnished the Mule with a casus belli. Galaxy, Randu, you spin romances. I find 
it hard to believe you had no hand in that. Come, it was a skillful job." 

Randu shook his white head, "Not of my doing. Nor, willfully, of my nephew's, who is now held 
prisoner at the Foundation, and may not live to see the completion of this so-skillful job. I have 
just heard from him. The Personal Capsule has been smuggled out somehow, come through 
the war zone, gone to Haven, and traveled from there to here. It has been a month on its 
travels." 



And?-' 


Randu leaned a heavy hand upon the heel of his palm and said, sadly, "I'm afraid we are cast 
for the same role that the onetime warlord of Kalgan played. The Mule is a mutant!" 

There was a momentary qualm; a faint impression of quickened heartbeats. Randu might easily 
have imagined it. 

When Mangin spoke, the evenness of his voice was unchanged, "How do you know?" 

"Only because my nephew says so, but he was on Kalgan. 

"What kind of a mutant? There are all kinds, you know." 

Randu forced the rising impatience down, "All kinds of mutants, yes, Mangin. All kinds! But only 
one kind of Mule. What kind of a mutant would start as an unknown, assemble an army, 
establish, they say, a five-mile asteroid as original base, capture a planet, then a system, then 
a region - and then attack the Foundation, and defeat them at Horleggor. And all in two or 
three years!" 

Ovall Gri shrugged, "So you think he'll beat the Foundation?" 

"I don't know. Suppose he does?" 

"Sorry, I can't go that far. You don't beat the Foundation. Look, there's not a new fact we have 
to go on except for the statements of a ... well, of an inexperienced boy. Suppose we shelve it 
for a while. With all the Mule's victories, we weren't worried until now, and unless he goes a 
good deal further than he has, I see no reason to change that. Yes?" 

Randu frowned and despaired at the cobweb texture of his argument. He said to both, "Have 
we yet made any contact with the Mule?" 

"No," both answered. 

"It's true, though, that we've tried, isn't it? It's true that there's not much purpose to our meeting 
unless we do reach him, isn't it? It's true that so far there's been more drinking than thinking, 
and more wooing than doing - I quote from an editorial in today's Radole Tribune - and all 
because we can't reach the Mule. Gentlemen, we have nearly a thousand ships waiting to be 
thrown into the fight at the proper moment to seize control of the Foundation. I say we should 
change that. I say, throw those thousand onto the board now - against the Mule." 

"You mean for the Tyrant Indbur and the bloodsuckers of the Foundation?" demanded Mangin, 
with quiet venom. 

Randu raised a weary hand, "Spare me the adjectives. Against the Mule, I say, and for 
l-don't-care-who." 

Ovall Gri rose, "Randu, I'll have nothing to do with that, You present it to the full council tonight 
if you particularly hunger for political suicide." 

He left without another word and Mangin followed silently, leaving Randu to drag out a lonely 



hour of endless, insoluble consideration. 

At the full council that night, he said nothing. 

But it was Ovall Gri who pushed into his room the next morning; an Ovall Gri only sketchily 
dressed and who had neither shaved nor combed his hair. 

Randu stared at him over a yet-uncleared breakfast table with an astonishment sufficiently 
open and strenuous to cause him to drop his pipe. 

Ovall said baldly, harshly. "Mnemon has been bombarded from space by treacherous attack." 
Randu's eyes narrowed, "The Foundation?" 

"The Mule!" exploded Ovall. "The Mule!" His words raced, "It was unprovoked and deliberate. 
Most of our fleet had joined the international flotilla. The few left as Home Squadron were 
insufficient and were blown out of the sky. There have been no landings yet, and there may not 
be, for half the attackers are reported destroyed - but it is war - and I have come to ask how 
Haven stands on the matter." 

"Haven, I am sure, will adhere to the spirit of the Charter of Federation. But, you see? He 
attacks us as well." 

"This Mule is a madman. Can he defeat the universe?" He faltered and sat down to seize 
Randu's wrist, "Our few survivors have reported the Mule's poss ... enemy's possession of a 
new weapon. A nuclear-field depressor." 

"A what?" 

Ovall said, "Most of our ships were lost because their nuclear weapons failed them. It could not 
have happened by either accident or sabotage. It must have been a weapon of the Mule. It 
didn't work perfectly; the effect was intermittent; there were ways to neutralize - my dispatches 
are not detailed. But you see that such a tool would change the nature of war and, possibly, 
make our entire fleet obsolete." 

Randu felt an old, old man. His face sagged hopelessly, "I am afraid a monster is grown that 
will devour all of us. Yet we must fight him." 


17. THE VISI-SONOR 

Ebling Mis's house in a not-so-pretentious neighborhood of Terminus City was well known to 
the intelligentsia, literati, and just-plain-well-read of the Foundation. Its notable characteristics 
depended, subjectively, upon the source material that was read. To a thoughtful biographer, it 
was the "symbolization of a retreat from a nonacademic reality," a society columnist gushed 
silkily at its "frightfully masculine atmosphere of careless disorder," a University Ph.D. called it 
brusquely, "bookish, but unorganized," a nonuniversity friend said, "good for a drink anytime 
and you can put your feet on the sofa," and a breezy newsweekly broadcast, that went in for 
color, spoke of the "rocky, down-to-earth, no-nonsense living quarters of blaspheming, Leftish, 



balding Ebling Mis." 

To Bayta, who thought for no audience but herself at the moment, and who had the advantage 
of first-hand information, it was merely sloppy. 

Except for the first few days, her imprisonment had been a light burden. Far lighter, it seemed, 
that this half-hour wait in the psychologist's home - under secret observation, perhaps? She 
had been with Toran then, at least. 

Perhaps she might have grown wearier of the strain, had not Magnifico's long nose drooped in 
a gesture that plainly showed his own far greater tension. 

Magnifico's pipe-stem legs were folded up under a pointed, sagging chin, as if he were trying to 
huddle himself into disappearance, and Bayta's hand went out in a gentle and automatic 
gesture of reassurance. Magnifico winced, then smiled. 

"Surely, my lady, it would seem that even yet my body denies the knowledge of my mind and 
expects of others' hands a blow." 

"There's no need for worry, Magnifico. I'm with you, and I won't let anyone hurt you." 

The clown's eyes sidled towards her, then drew away quickly. "But they kept me away from you 
earlier - and from your kind husband - and, on my word, you may laugh, but I was lonely for 
missing friendship." 

"I wouldn't laugh at that. I was, too." 

The clown brightened, and he hugged his knees closer. He said, "You have not met this man 
who will see us?" It was a cautious question. 

"No. But he is a famous man. I have seen him in the newscasts and heard quite a good deal of 
him. I think he's a good man, Magnifico, who means us no harm." 

"Yes?" The clown stirred uneasily. "That may be, my lady, but he has questioned me before, 
and his manner is of an abruptness and loudness that bequivers me. He is full of strange 
words, so that the answers to his questions could not worm out of my throat. Almost, I might 
believe the romancer who once played on my ignorance with a tale that, at such moments, the 
heart lodged in the windpipe and prevented speech." 

"But it's different now. We're two to his one, and he won't be able to frighten the both of us, will 
he?" 

"No, my lady." 

A door slammed somewheres, and the roaring of a voice entered the house. Just outside the 
room, it coagulated into words with a fierce, "Get the "Ga-LAX-y out of here!" and two 
uniformed guards were momentarily visible through the opening door, in quick retreat. 

Ebling Mis entered frowning, deposited a carefully wrapped bundle on the floor, and 
approached to shake Bayta's hand with careless pressure. Bayta returned it vigorously, 
man-fashion. Mis did a double-take as he turned to the clown, and favored the girl with a longer 



look. 

He said, "Married?" 

"Yes. We went through the legal formalities." 

Mis paused. Then, "Happy about it?" 

"So far." 

Mis shrugged, and turned again to Magnifico. He unwrapped the package, "Know what this is, 
boy?" 

Magnifico fairly hurled himself out of his seat and caught the multi-keyed instrument. He 
fingered the myriad knobby contacts and threw a sudden back somersault of joy, to the 
imminent destruction of the nearby furniture. 

He croaked, "A Visi-Sonor - and of a make to distill joy out of a dead man's heart." His long 
fingers caressed softly and slowly, pressing lightly on contacts with a rippling motion, resting 
momentarily on one key then another - and in the air before them there was a soft glowing 
rosiness, just inside the range of vision. 

Ebling Mis said, "All right, boy, you said you could pound on one of those gadgets, and there's 
your chance. You'd better tune it, though. It's out of a museum." Then, in an aside to Bayta, 
"Near as I can make it, no one on the Foundation can make it talk right." 

He leaned closer and said quickly, "The clown won't talk without you. Will you help?" 

She nodded. 

"Good!" he said. "His state of fear is almost fixed, and I doubt that his mental strength would 
possibly stand a psychic probe. If I'm to get anything out of him otherwise, he's got to feel 
absolutely at ease. You understand?" 

She nodded again. 

"This Visi-Sonor is the first step in the process. He says he can play it; and his reaction now 
makes it pretty certain that it's one of the great joys of his life. So whether the playing is good or 
bad, be interested and appreciative. Then exhibit friendliness and confidence in me. Above all, 
follow my lead in everything." There was a swift glance at Magnifico, huddled in a comer of the 
sofa, making rapid adjustments in the interior of the instrument. He was completely absorbed. 

Mis said in a conversational tone to Bayta, "Ever hear a Visi-Sonor?" 

"Once," said Bayta, equally casually, "at a concert of rare instruments. I wasn't impressed." 

"Well, I doubt that you came across good playing. There are very few really good players. It's 
not so much that it requires physical co-ordination - a multi-bank piano requires more, for 
instance - as a certain type of free-wheeling mentality." In a lower voice, "That's why our living 
skeleton there might be better than we think. More often than not, good players are idiots 
otherwise. It's one of those queer setups that makes psychology interesting." 



He added, in a patent effort to manufacture light conversation, "You know how the beblistered 
thing works? I looked it up for this purpose, and all I've made out so far is that its radiations 
stimulate the optic center of the brain directly, without ever touching the optic nerve. It's actually 
the utilization of a sense never met with in ordinary nature. Remarkable, when you come to 
think of it. What you hear is all right. That's ordinary. Eardrum, cochlea, all that. But - Shh! He's 
ready. Will you kick that switch. It works better in the dark." 

In the darkness, Magnifico was a mere blob, Ebling Mis a heavy-breathing mass. Bayta found 
herself straining her eyes anxiously, and at first with no effect. There was a thin, reedy quaver 
in the air, that wavered raggedly up the scale. It hovered, dropped and caught itself, gained in 
body, and swooped into a booming crash that had the effect of a thunderous split in a veiling 
curtain. 

A little globe of pulsing color grew in rhythmic spurts and burst in midair into formless gouts that 
swirled high and came down as curving streamers in interfacing patterns. They coalesced into 
little spheres, no two alike in color - and Bayta began discovering things. 

She noticed that closing her eyes made the color pattern all the clearer; that each little 
movement of color had its own little pattern of sound; that she could not identify the colors; and, 
lastly, that the globes were not globes but little figures. 

Little figures; little shifting flames, that danced and flickered in their myriads; that dropped out of 
sight and returned from nowhere; that whipped about one another and coalesced then into a 
new color. 

Incongruously, Bayta thought of the little blobs of color that come at night when you close your 
eyelids till they hurt, and stare patiently. There was the old familiar effect of the marching polka 
dots of shifting color, of the contracting concentric circles, of the shapeless masses that quiver 
momentarily. All that, larger, multivaried - and each little dot of color a tiny figure. 

They darted at her in pairs, and she lifted her hands with a sudden gasp, but they tumbled and 
for an instant she was the center of a brilliant snowstorm, while cold light slipped off her 
shoulders and down her arm in a luminous ski-slide, shooting off her stiff fingers and meeting 
slowly in a shining midair focus. Beneath it all, the sound of a hundred instruments flowed in 
liquid streams until she could not tell it from the light. 

She wondered if Ebling Mis were seeing the same thing, and if not, what he did see, The 
wonder passed, and then- 

She was watching again. The little figures-were they little figures? -little tiny women with 
burning hair that turned and bent too quickly for the mind to focus? -seized one another in 
star-shaped groups that turned - and the music was faint laughter - girls' laughter that began 
inside the ear. 

The stars drew together, sparked towards one another, grew slowly into structure - and from 
below, a palace shot upward in rapid evolution. Each brick a tiny color, each color a tiny spark, 
each spark a stabbing light that shifted patterns and led the eye skyward to twenty jeweled 
minarets. 



A glittering carpet shot out and about, whirling, spinning an insubstantial web that engulfed all 
space, and from it luminous shoots stabbed upward and branched into trees that sang with a 
music all their own. 

Bayta sat inclosed in it. The music welled about her in rapid, lyrical flights. She reached out to 
touch a fragile tree and blossoming spicules floated downwards and faded, each with its clear, 
tiny tinkle. 

The music crashed in twenty cymbals, and before her an area flamed up in a spout and 
cascaded down invisible steps into Bayta's lap, where it spilled over and flowed in rapid current, 
raising the fiery sparkle to her waist, while across her lap was a rainbow bridge and upon it the 
little figures- 

A palace, and a garden, and tiny men and women on a bridge, stretching out as far as she 
could see, swimming through the stately swells of stringed music converging in upon her- 

And then - there seemed a frightened pause, a hesitant, indrawn motion, a swift collapse. The 
colors fled, spun into a globe that shrank, and rose, and disappeared. 

And it was merely dark again. 

A heavy foot scratched for the pedal, reached it, and the light flooded in; the flat light of a prosy 
sun. Bayta blinked until the tears came, as though for the longing of what was gone. Ebling Mis 
was a podgy inertness with his eyes still round and his mouth still open. 

Only Magnifico himself was alive, and he fondled his Visi-Sonor in a crooning ecstasy. 

"My lady," he gasped, "it is indeed of an effect the most magical. It is of balance and response 
almost beyond hope in its delicacy and stability. On this, it would seem I could work wonders. 
How liked you my composition, my lady?" 

"Was it yours?" breathed Bayta. "Your own?" 

At her awe, his thin face turned a glowing red to the tip of his mighty nose. "My very own, my 
lady. The Mule liked it not, but often and often I have played it for my own amusement. It was 
once, in my youth, that I saw the palace - a gigantic place of jeweled riches that I saw from a 
distance at a time of high carnival. There were people of a splendor undreamed of - and 
magnificence more than ever I saw afterwards, even in the Mule's service. It is but a poor 
makeshift I have created, but my mind's poverty precludes more. I call it, 'The Memory of 
Heaven.'" 

Now through the midst of the chatter, Mis shook himself to active life. "Here," he said, "here, 
Magnifico, would you like to do that same thing for others?" 

For a moment, the clown drew back. "For others?" he quavered. 

"For thousands," cried Mis, "in the great Halls of the Foundation. Would you like to be your own 
master, and honored by all, wealthy, and ... and-" his imagination failed him. "And all that? Eh? 
What do you say?" 

"But how may I be all that, mighty sir, for indeed I am but a poor clown ungiven to the great 



things of the world?" 

The psychologist puffed out his lips, and passed the back of his hand across his brow. He said, 
"But your playing, man. The world is yours if you would play so for the mayor and his Trading 
Trusts. Wouldn't you like that?" 

The clown glanced briefly at Bayta, "Would she stay with me?" 

Bayta laughed, "Of course, silly. Would it be likely that I'd leave you now that you're on the point 
of becoming rich and famous?" 

"It would all be yours," he replied earnestly, "and surely the wealth of Galaxy itself would be 
yours before I could repay my debt to your kindness." 

"But," said Mis, casually, "if you would first help me-" 

"What is that?" 

The psychologist paused, and smiled, "A little surface probe that doesn't hurt. It wouldn't touch 
but the peel of your brain." 

There was a flare of deadly fear in Magnifico's eyes. "Not a probe. I have seen it used. It drains 
the mind and leaves an empty skull. The Mule did use it upon traitors and let them wander 
mindless through the streets, until out of mercy, they were killed." He held up his hand to push 
Mis away. 

"That was a psychic probe," explained Mis, patiently, "and even that would only harm a person 
when misused. This probe I have is a surface probe that wouldn't hurt a baby. " 

"That's right, Magnifico," urged Bayta. "It's only to help beat the Mule and keep him far away. 
Once that's done, you and I will be rich and famous all our lives." 

Magnifico held out a trembling hand, "Will you hold my hand, then?" 

Bayta took it in both her own, and the clown watched the approach of the burnished terminal 
plates with large eyes. 

Ebling Mis rested carelessly on the too-lavish chair in Mayor Indbur's private quarters, 
unregenerately unthankful for the condescension shown him and watched the small mayor's 
fidgeting unsympathetically. He tossed away a cigar stub and spat out a shred of tobacco. 

"And, incidentally, if you want something for your next concert at Mallow Hall, Indbur," he said, 
"you can dump out those electronic gadgeteers into the sewers they came from and have this 
little freak play the Visi-Sonor for you. Indbur - it's out of this world." 

Indbur said peevishly, "I did not call you here to listen to your lectures on music. What of the 
Mule? Tell me that. What of the Mule?" 

"The Mule? Well, I'll tell you - I used a surface probe and got little. Can't use the psychic probe 
because the freak is scared blind of it, so that his resistance will probably blow his unprintable 
mental fuses as soon as contact is made. But this is what I've got, if you'll just stop tapping your 



fingernails 

"First place, de-stress the Mule's physical strength. He's probably strong, but most of the freak's 
fairy tales about it are probably considerably blown up by his own fearful memory, He wears 
queer glasses and his eyes kill, he evidently has mental powers." 

"So much we had at the start," commented the mayor, sourly. 

"Then the probe confirms it, and from there on I've been working mathematically." 

"So? And how long will all this take? Your word-rattling will deafen me yet." 

"About a month, I should say, and I may have something for you. And I may not, of course. But 
what of it? If this is all outside Seldon's plans, our chances are precious little, unprintable little." 

Indbur whirled on the psychologist fiercely, "Now I have you, traitor. Lie! Say you're not one of 
these criminal rumormongers that are spreading defeatism and panic through the Foundation, 
and making my work doubly hard." 

"I? I?" Mis gathered anger slowly. 

Indbur swore at him, "Because by the dust-clouds of space, the Foundation will win - the 
Foundation must win." 

"Despite the loss at Horleggor?" 

"It was not a loss. You have swallowed that spreading lie, too? We were outnumbered and 
betreasoned-" 

"By whom?" demanded Mis, contemptuously. 

"By the lice-ridden democrats of the gutter," shouted Indbur back at him. "I have known for long 
that the fleet has been riddled by democratic cells. Most have been wiped out, but enough 
remain for the unexplained surrender of twenty ships in the thickest of the swarming fight. 
Enough to force an apparent defeat. 

"For that matter, my rough-tongued, simple patriot and epitome of the primitive virtues, what are 
your own connections with the democrats?" 

Ebling Mis shrugged it off, "You rave, do you know that? What of the retreat since, and the loss 
of half of Siwenna? Democrats again?" 

"No. Not democrats," the little man smiled sharply. "We retreat - as the Foundation has always 
retreated under attack, until the inevitable march of history turns with us. Already, I see the 
outcome. Already, the so-called underground of the democrats has issued manifestoes 
swearing aid and allegiance to the Government. It could be a feint, a cover for a deeper 
treachery, but I make good use of it, and the propaganda distilled from it will have its effect, 
whatever the crawling traitors scheme. And better than that-" 

"Even better than that, Indbur?" 

"Judge for yourself. Two days ago, the so-called Association of Independent Traders declared 



war on the Mule, and the Foundation fleet is strengthened, at a stroke, by a thousand ships. 
You see, this Mule goes too far. He finds us divided and quarreling among ourselves and under 
the pressure of his attack we unite and grow strong. He must lose. It is inevitable - as always." 

Mis still exuded skepticism, "Then you tell me that Seldon planned even for the fortuitous 
occurrence of a mutant." 

"A mutant! I can't tell him from a human, nor could you but for the ravings of a rebel captain, 
some outland youngsters, and an addled juggler and clown. You forget the most conclusive 
evidence of all - your own." 

"My own?" For just a moment, Mis was startled. 

"Your own," sneered the mayor. "The Time Vault opens in nine weeks. What of that? It opens 
for a crisis. If this attack of the Mule is not the crisis, where is the 'real' one, the one the Vault is 
opening for? Answer me, you lardish ball." 

The psychologist shrugged, "All tight. If it keeps you happy. Do me a favor, though. Just in case 
... just in case old Seldon makes his speech and it does go sour, suppose you let me attend the 
Grand Opening." 

"All right. Get out of here. And stay out of my sight for nine weeks." 

"With unprintable pleasure, you wizened horror," muttered Mis to himself as he left. 


18. FALL OF THE FOUNDATION 

There was an atmosphere about the Time Vault that just missed definition in several directions 
at once. It was not one of decay, for it was well-lit and well-conditioned, with the color scheme 
of the walls lively, and the rows of fixed chairs comfortable and apparently designed for eternal 
use. It was not even ancient, for three centuries had left no obvious mark. There was certainly 
no effort at the creation of awe or reverence, for the appointments were simple and everyday - 
next door to bareness, in fact. 

Yet after all the negatives were added and the sum disposed of, something was left - and that 
something centered about the glass cubicle that dominated half the room with its clear 
emptiness. Four times in three centuries, the living simulacrum of Hari Seldon himself had sat 
there and spoken. Twice he had spoken to no audience. 

Through three centuries and nine generations, the old man who had seen the great days of 
universal empire projected himself - and still he understood more of the Galaxy of his 
great-ultra-great-grandchildren, than did those grandchildren themselves. 

Patiently that empty cubicle waited. 

The first to arrive was Mayor Indbur III, driving his ceremonial ground car through the hushed 
and anxious streets. Arriving with him was his own chair, higher than those that belonged there, 
and wider. It was placed before all the others, and Indbur dominated all but the empty 



glassiness before him. 

The solemn official at his left bowed a reverent head. "Excellence, arrangements are completed 
for the widest possible sub-etheric spread for the official announcement by your excellence 
tonight." 

"Good. Meanwhile, special interplanetary programs concerning the Time Vault are to continue. 
There will, of course, be no predictions or speculations of any sort on the subject. Does popular 
reaction continue satisfactory?" 

"Excellence, very much so. The vicious rumors prevailing of late have decreased further. 
Confidence is widespread." 

"Good!" He gestured the man away and adjusted his elaborate neckpiece to a nicety. 

It was twenty minutes of noon! 

A select group of the great props of the mayoralty - the leaders of the great Trading 
organizations - appeared in ones and twos with the degree of pomp appropriate to their 
financial status and place in mayoral favor. Each presented himself to the mayor, received a 
gracious word or two, took an assigned seat. 

Somewhere, incongruous among the stilted ceremony of all this, Randu of Haven made his 
appearance and wormed his way unannounced to the mayor's seat. 

"Excellence!" he muttered, and bowed. 

Indbur frowned. "You have not been granted an audience. " 

"Excellence, I have requested one for a week." 

"I regret that the matters of State involved in the appearance of Seldon have-" 

"Excellence, I regret them, too, but I must ask you to rescind your order that the ships of the 
Independent Traders be distributed among the fleets of the Foundation." 

Indbur had flushed red at the interruption. "This is not the time for discussion." 

"Excellence, it is the only time," Randu whispered urgently. "As representative of the 
Independent Trading Worlds, I tell you such a move can not be obeyed. It must be rescinded 
before Seldon solves our problem for us. Once the emergency is passed, it will be too late to 
conciliate and our alliance will melt away." 

Indbur stared at Randu coldly. "You realize that I am head of the Foundation armed forces? 
Have I the right to determine military policy or have I not?" 

"Excellence, you have, but some things are inexpedient." 

"I recognize no inexpediency. It is dangerous to allow your people separate fleets in this 
emergency. Divided action plays into the hands of the enemy. We must unite, ambassador, 
militarily as well as politically." 



Randu felt his throat muscles tighten. He omitted the courtesy of the opening title. "You feet 
safe now that Seldon will speak, and you move against us. A month ago you were soft and 
yielding, when our ships defeated the Mule at Terel. I might remind you, sir, that it is the 
Foundation Fleet that has been defeated in open battle five times, and that the ships of the 
Independent Trading Worlds have won your victories for you." 

Indbur frowned dangerously, "You are no longer welcome upon Terminus, ambassador. Your 
return will be requested this evening. Furthermore, your connection with subversive democratic 
forces on Terminus will be - and has been - investigated." 

Randu replied, "When I leave, our ships will go with me. I know nothing of your democrats. I 
know only that your Foundation's ships have surrendered to the Mule by the treason of their 
high officers, not their sailors, democratic or otherwise. I tell you that twenty ships of the 
Foundation surrendered at Horleggor at the orders of their rear admiral, when they were 
unharmed and unbeaten. The rear admiral was your own close associate - he presided at the 
trial of my nephew when he first arrived from Kalgan. It is not the only case we know of and our 
ships and men will not be risked under potential traitors. 

Indbur said, "You will be placed under guard upon leaving here." 

Randu walked away under the silent stares of the contemptuous coterie of the rulers of 
Terminus. 

It was ten minutes of twelve! 

Bayta and Toran had already arrived. They rose in their back seats and beckoned to Randu as 
he passed. 

Randu smiled gently, "You are here after all. How did you work it?" 

"Magnifico was our politician," grinned Toran. "Indbur insists upon his Visi-Sonor composition 
based on the Time Vault, with himself, no doubt, as hero. Magnifico refused to attend without 
us, and there was no arguing him out of it. Ebling Mis is with us, or was. He's wandering about 
somewhere." Then, with a sudden access of anxious qravity, "Why, what's wronq, uncle? You 
don't look well." 

Randu nodded, "I suppose not. We're in for bad times, Toran. When the Mule is disposed of, 
our turn will come, I'm afraid. " 

A straight solemn figure in white approached, and greeted them with a stiff bow. 

Bayta's dark eyes smiled, as she held out her hand, "Captain Pritcher! Are you on space duty 
then?" 

The captain took the hand and bowed lower, "Nothing like it. Dr. Mis, I understand, has been 
instrumental in bringing me here, but it's only temporary. Back to home guard tomorrow. What 
time is it?" 

It was three minutes of twelve! 

Magnifico was the picture of misery and heartsick depression. His body curled up, in his eternal 



effort at self-effacement. His long nose was pinched at the nostrils and his large, down-slanted 
eyes darted uneasily about. 

He clutched at Bayta's hand, and when she bent down, he whispered, "Do you suppose, my 
lady, that all these great ones were in the audience, perhaps, when I ... when I played the 
Visi-Sonor?" 

"Everyone, I'm sure," Bayta assured him, and shook him gently. "And I'm sure they all think 
you're the most wonderful player in the Galaxy and that your concert was the greatest ever 
seen, so you just straighten yourself and sit correctly. We must have dignity." 

He smiled feebly at her mock-frown and unfolded his long-boned limbs slowly. 

It was noon - and the glass cubicle was no longer empty. 

It was doubtful that anyone had witnessed the appearance. It was a clean break; one moment 
not there and the next moment there. 

In the cubicle was a figure in a wheelchair, old and shrunken, from whose wrinkled face bright 
eyes shone, and whose voice, as it turned out, was the livest thing about him. A book lay face 
downward in his lap, and the voice came softly. 

"I am Hari Seldon!" 

He spoke through a silence, thunderous in its intensity. 

"I am Hari Seldon! I do not know if anyone is here at all by mere sense-perception but that is 
unimportant. I have few fears as yet of a breakdown in the Plan. For the first three centuries the 
percentage probability of nondeviation is nine-four point two." 

He paused to smile, and then said genially, "By the way, if any of you are standing, you may sit. 
If any would like to smoke, please do. I am not here in the flesh. I require no ceremony. 

"Let us take up the problem of the moment, then. For the first time, the Foundation has been 
faced, or perhaps, is in the last stages of facing, civil war. Till now, the attacks from without 
have been adequately beaten off, and inevitably so, according to the strict laws of 
psychohistory. The attack at present is that of a too-undisciplined outer group of the Foundation 
against the too-authoritarian central government. The procedure was necessary, the result 
obvious." 

The dignity of the high-born audience was beginning to break. Indbur was half out of his chair. 

Bayta leaned forward with troubled eyes. What was the great Seldon talking about? She had 
missed a few of the words- 

"-that the compromise worked out is necessary in two respects. The revolt of the Independent 
Traders introduces an element of new uncertainty in a government perhaps grown 
over-confident. The element of striving is restored. Although beaten, a healthy increase of 
democracy-" 

There were raised voices now. Whispers had ascended the scale of loudness, and the edge of 



panic was in them. 

Bayta said in Toran's ear, "Why doesn't he talk about the Mule? The Traders never revolted." 
Toran shrugged his shoulders. 

The seated figure spoke cheerfully across and through the increasing disorganization: 

"-a new and firmer coalition government was the necessary and beneficial outcome of the 
logical civil war forced upon the Foundation. And now only the remnants of the old Empire 
stand in the way of further expansion, and in them, for the next few years, at any rate, is no 
problem. Of course, I can not reveal the nature of the next prob-" 

In the complete uproar, Seldon's lips moved soundlessly. 

Ebling Mis was next to Randu, face ruddy. He was shouting. "Seldon is off his rocker. He's got 
the wrong crisis. Were your Traders ever planning civil war?" 

Randu said thinly, "We planned one, yes. We called it off in the face of the Mule." 

"Then the Mule is an added feature, unprepared for in Seldon's psychohistory. Now what's 
happened?" 

In the sudden, frozen silence, Bayta found the cubicle once again empty. The nuclear glow of 
the walls was dead, the soft current of conditioned air absent. 

Somewhere the sound of a shrill siren was rising and falling in the scale and Randu formed the 
words with his lips, "Space raid!" 

And Ebling Mis held his wrist watch to his ears and shouted suddenly, "Stopped, by the 
"Ga-LAX-y, is there a watch in the room that is going?" His voice was a roar. 

Twenty wrists went to twenty ears. And in far less than twenty seconds, it was quite certain that 
none were. 

"Then," said Mis, with a grim and horrible finality, "something has stopped all nuclear power in 
the Time Vault - and the Mule is attacking." 

Indbur's wail rose high above the noise, "Take your seats! The Mule is fifty parsecs distant." 

"He was," shouted back Mis, "a week ago. Right now, Terminus is being bombarded." 

Bayta felt a deep depression settle softly upon her. She felt its folds tighten close and thick, 
until her breath forced its way only with pain past her tightened throat. 

The outer noise of a gathering crowd was evident. The doors were thrown open and a harried 
figure entered, and spoke rapidly to Indbur, who had rushed to him. 

"Excellence," he whispered, "not a vehicle is running in the city, not a communication line to the 
outside is open. 

The Tenth Fleet is reported defeated and the Mule's ships are outside the atmosphere. The 
general staff-" 



Indbur crumpled, and was a collapsed figure of impotence upon the floor. In all that hall, not a 
voice was raised now. Even the growing crowd without was fearful, but silent, and the horror of 
cold panic hovered dangerously. 

Indbur was raised. Wine was held to his lips. His lips moved before his eyes opened, and the 
word they formed was, "Surrender!" 

Bayta found herself near to crying - not for sorrow or humiliation, but simply and plainly out of a 
vast frightened despair. Ebling Mis plucked at her sleeve. "Come, young lady-" 

She was pulled out of her chair, bodily. 

"We're leaving," he said, "and take your musician with you." The plump scientist's lips were 
trembling and colorless. 

"Magnifico," said Bayta, faintly. The clown shrank in horror. His eyes were glassy. 

"The Mule," he shrieked. "The Mule is coming for me." 

He thrashed wildly at her touch. Toran leaned over and brought his fist up sharply. Magnifico 
slumped into unconsciousness and Toran carried him out potato-sack fashion. 

The next day, the ugly, battle-black ships of the Mule poured down upon the landing fields of 
the planet Terminus. The attacking general sped down the empty main street of Terminus City 
in a foreign-made ground car that ran where a whole city of atomic cars still stood useless. 

The proclamation of occupation was made twenty-four hours to the minute after Seldon had 
appeared before the former mighty of the Foundation. 

Of all the Foundation planets, only the Independent Traders still stood, and against them the 
power of the Mule - conqueror of the Foundation - now turned itself. 


19. START OF THE SEARCH 

The lonely planet, Haven - only planet of an only sun of a Galactic Sector that trailed raggedly 
off into intergalactic vacuum - was under siege. 

In a strictly military sense, it was certainly under siege, since no area of space on the Galactic 
side further than twenty parsecs distance was outside range of the Mule's advance bases. In 
the four months since the shattering fall of the Foundation, Haven's communications had fallen 
apart like a spiderweb under the razor's edge. The ships of Haven converged inwards upon the 
home world, and only Haven itself was now a fighting base. 

And in other respects, the siege was even closer; for the shrouds of helplessness and doom 
had already invaded 

Bayta plodded her way down the pink-waved aisle past the rows of milky plastic-topped tables 
and found her seat by blind reckoning. She eased on to the high, armless chair, answered 
half-heard greetings mechanically, rubbed a wearily-itching eye with the back of a weary hand, 



and reached for her menu. 


She had time to register a violent mental reaction of distaste to the pronounced presence of 
various cultured-fungus dishes, which were considered high delicacies at Haven, and which her 
Foundation taste found highly inedible - and then she was aware of the sobbing near her and 
looked up. 

Until then, her notice of Juddee, the plain, snub-nosed, indifferent blonde at the dining unit 
diagonally across had been the superficial one of the nonacquaintance. And now Juddee was 
crying, biting woefully at a moist handkerchief, and choking back sobs until her complexion was 
blotched with turgid red. Her shapeless radiation-proof costume was thrown back upon her 
shoulders, and her transparent face shield had tumbled forward into her dessert, and there 
remained. 

Bayta joined the three girls who were taking turns at the eternally applied and eternally 
inefficacious remedies of shoulder-patting, hair-smoothing, and incoherent murmuring. 

"What's the matter?" she whispered. 

One turned to her and shrugged a discreet, "I don't know." Then, feeling the inadequacy of the 
gesture, she pulled Bayta aside. 

"She's had a hard day, I guess. And she's worrying about her husband." 

"Is he on space patrol?" 

"Yes". 

Bayta reached a friendly hand out to Juddee. 

"Why don't you go home, Juddee?" Her voice was a cheerfully businesslike intrusion on the 
soft, flabby inanities that had preceded. 

Juddee looked up half in resentment. "I've been out once this week already-" 

"Then you'll be out twice. If you try to stay on, you know, you'll just be out three days next week 
- so going home now amounts to patriotism. Any of you girls work in her department? Well, 
then, suppose you take care of her card. Better go to the washroom first, Juddee, and get the 
peaches and cream back where it belongs. Go ahead! Shoo!" 

Bayta returned to her seat and took up the menu again with a dismal relief. These moods were 
contagious. One weeping girl would have her entire department in a frenzy these nerve-torn 
days. 

She made a distasteful decision, pressed the correct buttons at her elbow and put the menu 
back into its niche. 

The tall, dark girl opposite her was saying, "Isn't much any of us can do except cry, is there?" 

Her amazingly full lips scarcely moved, and Bayta noticed that their ends were carefully 
touched to exhibit that artificial, just-so half-smile that was the current last word in 
sophistication. 



Bayta investigated the insinuating thrust contained in the words with lashed eyes and 
welcomed the diversion of the arrival of her lunch, as the tile-top of her unit moved inward and 
the food lifted. She tore the wrappings carefully off her cutlery and handled them gingerly till 
they cooled. 

She said, "Can't you think of anything else to do, Hella?" 

"Oh, yes," said Hella. "/can!" She flicked her cigarette with a casual and expert finger-motion 
into the little recess provided and the tiny flash caught it before it hit shallow bottom. 

"For instance," and Hella clasped slender, well-kept hands under her chin, "I think we could 
make a very nice arrangement with the Mule and stop all this nonsense. But then I don't have 
the ... uh ... facilities to manage to get out of places quickly when the Mule takes over." 

Bayta's clear forehead remained clear. Her voice was light and indifferent. "You don't happen to 
have a brother or husband in the fighting ships, do you?" 

"No. All the more credit that I see no reason for the sacrifice of the brothers and husbands of 
others." 

"The sacrifice will come the more surely for surrender." 

"The Foundation surrendered and is at peace. Our men are away and the Galaxy is against 
us." 

Bayta shrugged, and said sweetly, "I'm afraid it is the first of the pair that bothers you." She 
returned to her vegetable platter and ate it with the clammy realization of the silence about her. 
No one in ear-shot had cared to answer Hella's cynicism. 

She left quickly, after stabbing at the button which cleared her dining unit for the next shift's 
occupant. 

A new girl, three seats away, stage-whispered to Hella, "Who was she?" 

Hella's mobile lips curled in indifference. "She's our coordinator's niece. Didn't you know that?" 

"Yes?" Her eyes sought out the last glimpse of disappearing back. "What's she doing here?" 

"Just an assembly girl. Don't you know it's fashionable to be patriotic? It's all so democratic, it 
makes me retch." 

"Now, Hella," said the plump girl to her right. "She's never pulled her uncle on us yet. Why don't 
you lay off?" 

Hella ignored her neighbor with a glazed sweep of eyes and lit another cigarette. 

The new girl was listening to the chatter of the bright-eyed accountant opposite. The words 
were coming quickly, 

"-and she's supposed to have been in the Vault - actually in the Vault, you know - when 
Seldon spoke - and they say the mayor was in frothing furies and there were riots, and all of 
that sort of thing, you know. She got away before the Mule landed, and they say she had the 



most tha-rilling escape - had to go through the blockade, and all - and I do wonder she doesn't 
write a book about it, these war books being so popular these days, you know. And she was 
supposed to be on this world of the Mule's, too - Kalgan, you know - and-" 

The time bell shrilled and the dining room emptied slowly. The accountant's voice buzzed on, 
and the new girl interrupted only with the conventional and wide-eyed, "Really-y-y-y?" at 
appropriate points. 

The huge cave lights were being shielded group-wise in the gradual descent towards the 
darkness that meant sleep for the righteous and hard-working, when Bayta returned home. 

Toran met her at the door, with a slice of buttered bread in his hand. 

"Where've you been?" he asked, food-muffled. Then, more clearly, "I've got a dinner of sorts 
rassled up. If it isn't much, don't blame me." 

But she was circling him, wide-eyed. "Torie! Where's your uniform? What are you doing in 
civvies?" 

"Orders, Bay. Randu is holed up with Ebling Mis right now, and what it's all about, I don't know. 
So there you have everything." 

"Am I going?" She moved towards him impulsively. 

He kissed her before he answered, "I believe so. It will probably be dangerous." 

"What isn't dangerous?" 

"Exactly. Oh, yes, and I've already sent for Magnifico, so he's probably coming too." 

"You mean his concert at the Engine Factory will have to be cancelled." 

"Obviously." 

Bayta passed into the next room and sat down to a meal that definitely bore signs of having 
been "rassled-up." She cut the sandwiches in two with quick efficiency and said: 

"That's too bad about the concert. The girls at the factory were looking forward to it. Magnifico, 
too, for that matter." She shook her head. "He's such a queer thing." 

"Stirs your mother-complex, Bay, that's what he does. Some day we'll have a baby, and then 
you'll forget Magnifico." 

'Bayta answered from the depths of her sandwich, "Strikes me that you're all the stirring my 
mother-complex can stand." 

And then she laid the sandwich down, and was gravely serious in a moment. 

"Torie." 

"M-m-m?" 

"Torie, I was at City Hall today - at the Bureau of Production. That is why I was so late today." 



"What were you doing there?" 

"Well..." she hesitated, uncertainly. "It's been building up. I was getting so I couldn't stand it at 
the factory. Morale just doesn't exist. The girls go on crying jags for no particular reason. Those 
who don't get sick become sullen. Even the little mousie types pout. In my particular section, 
production isn't a quarter what it was when I came, and there isn't a day that we have a full 
roster of workers." 

"All right," said Toran, "tie in the B. of P. What did you do there?" 

"Asked a few questions. And it's so, Torie, it's so all over Haven. Dropping production, 
increasing sedition and disaffection. The bureau chief just shrugged his shoulders - after I had 
sat in the anteroom an hour to see him, and only got in because I was the co-ordinator's niece 
- and said it was beyond him. Frankly, I don't think he cared." 

"Now, don't go off base, Bay." 

"I don't think he did." She was strenuously fiery. "I tell you there's something wrong. It's that 
same horrible frustration that hit me in the Time Vault when Seldon deserted us. You felt it 
yourself." 

"Yes, I did." 

"Well, it's back," she continued savagely. "And we'll never be able to resist the Mule. Even if we 
had the material, we lack the heart, the spirit, the will - Torie, there's no use fighting-" 

Bayta had never cried in Toran's memory, and she did not cry now. Not really. But Toran laid a 
light hand on her shoulder and whispered, "Suppose you forget it, baby. I know what you mean. 
But there's nothing-" 

"Yes, there's nothing we can do! Everyone says that - and we just sit and wait for the knife to 
come down." 

She returned to what was left of her sandwich and tea. Quietly, Toran was arranging the beds. 

It was quite dark outside. 

Randu, as newly-appointed co-ordinator - in itself a wartime post - of the confederation of 
cities on Haven, had been assigned, at his own request, to an upper room, out of the window of 
which he could brood over the roof tops and greenery of the city. Now, in the fading of the cave 
lights, the city receded into the level lack of distinction of the shades. Randu did not care to 
meditate upon the symbolism. 

He said to Ebling Mis - whose clear, little eyes seemed to have no further interest than the 
red-filled goblet in his hand - "There's a saying on Haven that when the cave lights go out, it is 
time for the righteous and hard-working to sleep." 

"Do you sleep much lately?" 

"No! Sorry to call you so late, Mis. I like the night better somehow these days. Isn't that 
strange? The people on Haven condition themselves pretty strictly on the lack of light meaning 
sleep. Myself, too. But it's different now-" 



"You're hiding," said Mis, flatly. "You're surrounded by people in the waking period, and you feel 
their eyes and their hopes on you. You can't stand up under it. In the sleep period, you're free." 

"Do you feel it, too, then? This miserable sense of defeat?" 

Ebling Mis nodded slowly, "I do. It's a mass psychosis, an unprintable mob panic. "Ga-LAX-y, 
Randu, what do you expect? Here you have a whole culture brought up to a blind, blubbering 
belief that a folk hero of the past has everything all planned out and is taking care of every little 
piece of their unprintable lives. The thought-pattern evoked has religious characteristics, and 
you know what that means." 

"Not a bit." 

Mis was not enthusiastic about the necessity of explanation. He never was. So he growled, 
stared at the long cigar he rolled thoughtfully between his fingers and said, "Characterized by 
strong faith reactions. Beliefs can't be shaken short of a major shock, in which case, a fairly 
complete mental disruption results. Mild cases-hysteria, morbid sense of insecurity. Advanced 
cases - madness and suicide." 

Randu bit at a thumbnail. "When Seldon fails us, in other words, our prop disappears, and 
we've been leaning upon it so long, our muscles are atrophied to where we can not stand 
without it." 

"That's it. Sort of a clumsy metaphor, but that's it." 

"And you, Ebling, what of your own muscles?" 

The psychologist filtered a long draught of air through his cigar, and let the smoke laze out. 
"Rusty, but not atrophied. My profession has resulted in just a bit of independent thinking." 

"And you see a way out?" 

"No, but there must be one. Maybe Seldon made no provisions for the Mule. Maybe he didn't 
guarantee our victory. But, then, neither did he guarantee defeat. He's just out of the game and 
we're on our own. The Mule can be licked." 

"How?" 

"By the only way anyone can be licked - by attacking in strength at weakness. See here, 

Randu, the Mule isn't a superman. If he is finally defeated, everyone will see that for himself. 

It's just that he's an unknown, and the legends cluster quickly. He's supposed to be a mutant. 
Well, what of that? A mutant means a 'superman' to the ignoramuses of humanity. Nothing of 
the sort. 

"It's been estimated that several million mutants are born in the Galaxy every day. Of the 
several million, all but one or two percent can be detected only by means of microscopes and 
chemistry. Of the one or two percent macromutants, that is, those with mutations detectable to 
the naked eye or naked mind, all but one or two percent are freaks, fit for the amusement 
centers, the laboratories, and death. Of the few macromutants whose differences are to the 
good, almost all are harmless curiosities, unusual in some single respect, normal - and often 



subnormal - in most others. You see that, Randu?" 

"I do. But what of the Mule?" 

"Supposing the Mule to be a mutant then, we can assume that he has some attribute, 
undoubtedly mental, which can be used to conquer worlds. In other respects, he undoubtedly 
has his shortcomings, which we must locate. He would not be so secretive, so shy of others' 
eyes, if these shortcomings were not apparent and fatal. If he's a mutant." 

"Is there an alternative?" 

"There might be. Evidence for mutation rests on Captain Han Pritcher of what used to be 
Foundation's Intelligence. He drew his conclusions from the feeble memories of those who 
claimed to know the Mule-or somebody who might have been the Mule - in infancy and early 
childhood. Pritcher worked on slim pickings there, and what evidence he found might easily 
have been planted by the Mule for his own purposes, for it's certain that the Mule has been 
vastly aided by his reputation as a mutant-superman." 

"This is interesting. How long have you thought that?" 

"I never thought that, in the sense of believing it. It is merely an alternative to be considered. 

For instance, Randu, suppose the Mule has discovered a form of radiation capable of 
depressing mental energy just as he is in possession of one which depresses nuclear 
reactions. What then, eh? Could that explain what's hitting us now - and what did hit the 
Foundation?" 

Randu seemed immersed in a near-wordless gloom. 

He said, "What of your own researches on the Mule's clown." 

And now Ebling Mis hesitated. "Useless as yet. I spoke bravely to the mayor previous to the 
Foundation's collapse, mainly to keep his courage up - partly to keep my own up as well. But, 
Randu, if my mathematical tools were up to it, then from the clown alone I could analyze the 
Mule completely. Then we would have him. Then we could solve the queer anomalies that have 
impressed me already." 

"Such as?" 

"Think, man. The Mule defeated the navies of the Foundation at will, but he has not once 
managed to force the much weaker fleets of the Independent Traders to retreat in open 
combat. The Foundation fell at a blow; the Independent Traders hold out against all his 
strength. He first used Extinguishing Field upon the nuclear weapons of the Independent 
Traders of Mnemon. The element of surprise lost them that battle but they countered the Field. 
He was never able to use it successfully against the Independents again. 

"But over and over again, it worked against Foundation forces. It worked on the Foundation 
itself. Why? With our present knowledge, it is all illogical. So there must be factors of which we 
are not aware." 


Treachery? 



"That's rattle-pated nonsense, Randu. Unprintable twaddle. There wasn't a man on the 
Foundation who wasn't sure of victory. Who would betray a certain-to-win side." 

Randu stepped to the curved window and stared unseeingly out into the unseeable. He said, 
"But we're certain to lose now, if the Mule had a thousand weaknesses; if he were a network of 
holes-" 

He did not turn. It was as if the slump of his back, the nervous groping for one another of the 
hands behind him that spoke. He said, "We escaped easily after the Time Vault episode, 

Ebling. Others might have escaped as well. A few did. Most did not. The Extinguishing Field 
could have been counteracted. It asked ingenuity and a certain amount of labor. All the ships of 
the Foundation Navy could have flown to Haven or other nearby planets to continue the fight as 
we did. Not one percent did so. In effect, they deserted to the enemy. 

"The Foundation underground, upon which most people here seem to rely so heavily, has thus 
far done nothing of consequence. The Mule has been politic enough to promise to safeguard 
the property and profits of the great Traders and they have gone over to him." 

Ebling Mis said stubbornly, "The plutocrats have always been against us." 

"They always held the power, too. Listen, Ebling. We have reason to believe that the Mule or 
his tools have already been in contact with powerful men among the Independent Traders. At 
least ten of the twenty-seven Trading Worlds are known to have gone over to the Mule. 

Perhaps ten more waver. There are personalities on Haven itself who would not be unhappy 
over the Mule's domination. It's apparently an insurmountable temptation to give up 
endangered political power, if that will maintain your hold over economic affairs. " 

"You don't think Haven can fight the Mule?" 

"I don't think Haven will." And now Randu turned his troubled face full upon the psychologist. "I 
think Haven is waiting to surrender. It's what I called you here to tell you. I want you to leave 
Haven." 

Ebling Mis puffed up his plump checks in amazement. "Already?" 

Randu felt horribly tired. "Ebling, you are the Foundation's greatest psychologist. The real 
master-psychologists went out with Seldon, but you're the best we have. You're our only 
chance of defeating the Mule. You can't do that here; you'll have to go to what's left of the 
Empire." 

"To Trantor?" 

"That's right. What was once the Empire is bare bones today, but something must still be at the 
center. They've got the records there, Ebling. You may learn more of mathematical psychology; 
perhaps enough to be able to interpret the clown's mind. He will go with you, of course." 

Mis responded dryly, "I doubt if he'd be willing to, even for fear of the Mule, unless your niece 
went with him." 


I know that. Toran and Bayta are leaving with you for that very reason. And, Ebling, there's 



another, greater purpose. Hari Seldon founded two Foundations three centuries ago; one at 
each end of the Galaxy. You must find that Second Foundation. " 


20. CONSPIRATOR 

The mayor's palace - what was once the mayor's palace - was a looming smudge in the 
darkness. The city was quiet under its conquest and curfew, and the hazy milk of the great 
Galactic Lens, with here and there a lonely star, dominated the sky of the Foundation. 

In three centuries the Foundation had grown from a private project of a small group of scientists 
to a tentacular trade empire sprawling deep into the Galaxy and half a year had flung it from its 
heights to the status of another conquered province. 

Captain Flan Pritcher refused to grasp that. 

The city's sullen nighttime quiet, the darkened palace, intruder-occupied, were symbolic 
enough, but Captain Flan Pritcher, just within the outer gate of the palace, with the tiny nuclear 
bomb under his tongue, refused to understand. 

A shape drifted closer - the captain bent his head. 

The whisper came deathly low, "The alarm system is as it always was, captain. Proceed! It will 
register nothing." 

Softly, the captain ducked through the low archway, and down the fountain-lined path to what 
had been Indbur's garden. 

Four months ago had been the day in the Time Vault, the fullness of which his memory balked 
at. Singly and separately the impressions would come back, unwelcome, mostly at night. 

Old Seldon speaking his benevolent words that were so shatteringly wrong - the jumbled 
confusion - Indbur, with his mayoral costume incongruously bright about his pinched, 
unconscious face - the frightened crowds gathering quickly, waiting noiselessly for the 
inevitable word of surrender - the young man, Toran, disappearing out of a side door with the 
Mule's clown dangling over his shoulder. 

And himself, somehow out of it all afterward, with his car unworkable. 

Shouldering his way along and through the leaderless mob that was already leaving the city - 
destination unknown. 

Making blindly for the various rat holes which were - which had once been - the headquarters 
for a democratic underground that for eighty years had been failing and dwindling. 

And the rat holes were empty. 

The next day, black alien ships were momentarily visible in the sky, sinking gently into the 
clustered buildings of the nearby city. Captain Flan Pritcher felt an accumulation of 
helplessness and despair drown him. 



He started his travels in earnest. 


In thirty days he had covered nearly two hundred miles on foot, changed to the clothing of a 
worker in the hydroponic factories whose body he found newly-dead by the side of the road, 
grown a fierce beard of russet intensity 

And found what was left of the underground. 

The city was Newton, the district a residential one of one-time elegance slowly edging towards 
squalor, the house an undistinguished member of a row, and the man a small-eyed, big-boned 
whose knotted fists bulged through his pockets and whose wiry body remained unbudgingly in 
the narrow door opening. 

The captain mumbled, "I come from Miran." 

The man returned the gambit, grimly. "Miran is early this year." 

The captain said, "No earlier than last year." 

But the man did not step aside. He said, "Who are you?" 

"Aren't you Fox?" 

"Do you always answer by asking?" 

The captain took an imperceptibly longer breath, and then said calmly, "I am Han Pritcher, 
Captain of the Fleet, and member of the Democratic Underground Party. Will you let me in?" 

The Fox stepped aside. He said, "My real name is Orum Palley." 

He held out his hand. The captain took it. 

The room was well-kept, but not lavish. In one comer stood a decorative book-film projector, 
which to the captain's military eyes might easily have been a camouflaged blaster of 
respectable caliber. The projecting lens covered the doorway, and such could be remotely 
controlled. 

The Fox followed his bearded guest's eyes, and smiled tightly. He said, "Yes! But only in the 
days of Indbur and his lackey-hearted vampires. It wouldn't do much against the Mule, eh? 
Nothing would help against the Mule. Are you hungry?" 

The captain's jaw muscles tightened beneath his beard, and he nodded. 

"It'll take a minute if you don't mind waiting." The Fox removed cans from a cupboard and 
placed two before Captain Pritcher. "Keep your finger on it, and break them when they're hot 
enough. My heat-control unit's out of whack. Things like that remind you there's a war on - or 
was on, eh?" 

His quick words had a jovial content, but were said in anything but a jovial tone - and his eyes 
were coldly thoughtful. He sat down opposite the captain and said, "There'll be nothing but a 
burn-spot left where you're sitting, if there's anything about you I don't like. Know that?" 



The captain did not answer. The cans before him opened at a pressure. 

The Fox said, shortly, "Stew! Sorry, but the food situation is short." 

"I know," said the captain. He ate quickly; not looking up. 

The Fox said, "I once saw you. I'm trying to remember, and the beard is definitely out of the 
picture." 

"I haven't shaved in thirty days." Then, fiercely, "What do you want? I had the correct 
passwords. I have identification." 

The other waved a hand, "Oh, I'll grant you're Pritcher all right. But there are plenty who have 
the passwords, and the identifications, and the identities - who are with the Mule. Ever hear of 
Levvaw, eh?" 

"Yes." 

"He's with the Mule." 

"What? He-" 

"Yes. He was the man they called 'No Surrender.'" The Fox's lips made laughing motions, with 
neither sound nor humor. "Then there's Willig. With the Mule! Garre and Noth. With the Mule! 
Why not Pritcher as well, eh? How would I know?" 

The captain merely shook his head. 

"But it doesn't matter," said the Fox, softly. "They must have my name, if Noth has gone over - 
so if you're legitimate, you're in more new danger than I am over our acquaintanceship." 

The captain had finished eating. He leaned back, "If you have no organization here, where can 
I find one? The Foundation may have surrendered, but I haven't." 

"So! You can't wander forever, captain. Men of the Foundation must have travel permits to 
move from town to town these days. You know that? Also identity cards. You have one? Also, 
all officers of the old Navy have been requested to report to the nearest occupation 
headquarters. That's you, eh?" 

"Yes." The captain's voice was hard. "Do you think I run through fear. I was on Kalgan not long 
after its fall to the Mule. Within a month, not one of the old warlord's officers was at large, 
because they were the natural military leaders of any revolt. It's always been the underground's 
knowledge that no revolution can be successful without the control of at least part of the Navy. 
The Mule evidently knows it, too." 

The Fox nodded thoughtfully, "Logical enough. The Mule is thorough." 

"I discarded the uniform as soon as I could. I grew the beard. Afterwards there may be a 
chance that others have taken the same action." 


Are you married? 



"My wife is dead. I have no children. 

"You're hostage-immune, then." 

"Yes." 

"You want my advice?" 

"If you have any." 

A don't know what the Mule's policy is or what he intends, but skilled workers have not been 
harmed so far. Pay rates have gone up. Production of all sorts of nuclear weapons is booming." 

"Yes? Sounds like a continuing offensive." 

"I don't know. The Mule's a subtle son of a drab, and he may merely be soothing the workers 
into submission. If Seldon couldn't figure him out with all his psychohistory, I'm not going to try. 
But you're wearing work clothes. That suggests something, eh?" 

"I'm not a skilled worker." 

"You've had a military course in nucleics, haven't you?" 

"Certainly." 

"That's enough. The Nuclear-Field Bearings, Inc., is located here in town. Tell them you've had 
experience. The stinkers who used to run the factory for Indbur are still running it - for the 
Mule. They won't ask questions, as long as they need more workers to make their fat hunk. 
They'll give you an identity card and you can apply for a room in the Corporation's housing 
district. You might start now." 

In that manner, Captain Han Pritcher of the National Fleet became Shield-man Lo Moro of the 
45 Shop of Nuclear-Field Bearings, Inc. And from an Intelligence agent, he descended the 
social scale to "conspirator"- a calling which led him months later to what had been Indbur's 
private garden, 

In the garden, Captain Pritcher consulted the radometer in the palm of his hand. The inner 
warning field was still in operation, and he waited. Half an hour remained to the life of the 
nuclear bomb in his mouth. He rolled it gingerly with his tongue. 

The radometer died into an ominous darkness and the captain advanced quickly. 

So far, matters had progressed well. 

He reflected objectively that the life of the nuclear bomb was his as well; that its death was his 
death - and the Mule's death. 

And the grand climacteric of a four-month's private war would be reached; a war that had 
passed from flight through a Newton factory 

For two months, Captain Pritcher wore leaden aprons and heavy face shields, till all things 
military had been frictioned off his outer bearing. He was a laborer, who collected his pay, spent 



his evenings in town, and never discussed politics. 

For two months, he did not see the Fox. 

And then, one day, a man stumbled past his bench, and there was a scrap of paper in his 
pocket. The word "Fox" was on it. Fie tossed it into the nuclear chamber, where it vanished in a 
sightless puff, sending the energy output up a millimicrovolt - and turned back to his work. 

That night he was at the Fox's home, and took a hand in a game of cards with two other men 
he knew by reputation and one by name and face. 

Over the cards and the passing and repassing tokens, they spoke. 

The captain said, "It's a fundamental error. You live in the exploded past. For eighty years our 
organization has been waiting for the correct historical moment. We've been blinded by 
Seldon's psychohistory, one of the first propositions of which is that the individual does not 
count, does not make history, and that complex social and economic factors override him, 
make a puppet out of him." Fie adjusted his cards carefully, appraised their value and said, as 
he put out a token. "Why not kill the Mule?" 

"Well, now, and what good would that do?" demanded the man at his left, fiercely. 

"You see," said the captain, discarding two cards, "that's the attitude. What is one man - out of 
quadrillions. The Galaxy won't stop rotating because one man dies. But the Mule is not a man, 
he is a mutant. Already, he had upset Seldon's plan, and if you'll stop to analyze the 
implications, it means that he - one man - one mutant - upset all of Seldon's psychohistory. If 
he had never lived, the Foundation would not have fallen. If he ceased living, it would not 
remain fallen. 

"Come, the democrats have fought the mayors and the traders for eighty years by connivery. 
Let's try assassination." 

"Flow?" interposed the Fox, with cold common sense. 

The captain said, slowly, "I've spent three months of thought on that with no solution. I came 
here and had it in five minutes." Fie glanced briefly at the man whose broad, pink melon of a 
face smiled from the place at his right. "You were once Mayor Indbur's chamberlain. I did not 
know you were of the underground," 

"Nor I, that you were." 

"Well, then, in your capacity as chamberlain you periodically checked the working of the alarm 
system of the palace." 

"I did." 

"And the Mule occupies the palace now." 

"So it has been announced - though he is a modest conqueror who makes no speeches, 
proclamations nor public appearances of any sort." 

"That's an old story, and affects nothing. You, my ex-chamberlain, are all we need." 



The cards were shown and the Fox collected the stakes. Slowly, he dealt a new hand. 

The man who had once been chamberlain picked up his cards, singly. "Sorry, captain. I 
checked the alarm system, but it was routine. I know nothing about it." 

"I expected that, but your mind carries an eidetic memory of the controls if it can be probed 
deeply enough - with a psychic probe." 

The chamberlain's ruddy face paled suddenly and sagged. The cards in his hand crumpled 
under sudden fist-pressure, "A psychic probe?" 

"You needn't worry," said the captain, sharply. "I know how to use one. It will not harm you past 
a few days' weakness. And if it did, it is the chance you take and the price you pay. There are 
some among us, no doubt, who from the controls of the alarm could determine the wavelength 
combinations. There are some among us who could manufacture a small bomb under 
time-control and I myself will carry it to the Mule." 

The men gathered over the table. 

The captain announced, "On a given evening, a riot will start in Terminus City in the 
neighborhood of the palace. No real fighting. Disturbance - then flight. As long as the palace 
guard is attracted ... or, at the very least, distracted-" 

From that day for a month the preparations went on, and Captain Flan Pritcher of the National 
Fleet having become conspirator descended further in the social scale and became an 
"assassin." 

Captain Pritcher, assassin, was in the palace itself, and found himself grimly pleased with his 
psychology. A thorough alarm system outside meant few guards within. In this case, it meant 
none at all. 

The floor plan was clear in his mind. Fie was a blob moving noiselessly up the well-carpeted 
ramp. At its head, he flattened against the wall and waited. 

The small closed door of a private room was before him. Behind that door must be the mutant 
who had beaten the unbeatable. Fie was early - the bomb had ten minutes of life in it. 

Five of these passed, and still in all the world there was no sound. The Mule had five minutes to 
live - So had Captain Pritcher- 

He stepped forward on sudden impulse. The plot could no longer fail. When the bomb went, the 
palace would go with it - all the palace. A door between - ten yards between - was nothing. 

But he wanted to see the Mule as they died together. 

In a last, insolent gesture, he thundered upon the door. 

And it opened and let out the blinding light. 

Captain Pritcher staggered, then caught himself. The solemn man, standing in the center of the 
small room before a suspended fish bowl, looked up mildly. 

FHis uniform was a somber black, and as he tapped the bowl in an absent gesture, it bobbed 



quickly and the feather-finned, orange and vermilion fish within darted wildly. 

He said, "Come in, captain!" 

To the captain's quivering tongue the little metal globe beneath was swelling ominously - a 
physical impossibility, the captain knew. But it was in its last minute of life. 

The uniformed man said, "You had better spit out the foolish pellet and free yourself for speech. 
It won't blast." 

The minute passed and with a slow, sodden motion the captain bent his head and dropped the 
silvery globe into his palm. With a furious force it was flung against the wall. It rebounded with a 
tiny, sharp clangor, gleaming harmlessly as it flew. 

The uniformed man shrugged. "So much for that, then. It would have done you no good in any 
case, captain. I am not the Mule. You will have to be satisfied with his viceroy." 

"How did you know?" muttered the captain, thickly. 

"Blame it on an efficient counter-espionage system. I can name every member of your little 
gang, every step of their planning-" 

"And you let it go this far?" 

"Why not? It has been one of my great purposes here to find you and some others. Particularly 
you. I might have had you some months ago, while you were still a worker at the Newton 
Bearings Works, but this is much better. If you hadn't suggested the main outlines of the plot 
yourself, one of my own men would have advanced something of much the same sort for you. 
The result is quite dramatic, and rather grimly humorous." 

The captain's eyes were hard. "I find it so, too. Is it all over now?" 

"Just begun. Come, captain, sit down. Let us leave heroics for the fools who are impressed by 
it. Captain, you are a capable man. According to the information I have, you were the first on 
the Foundation to recognize the power of the Mule. Since then you have interested yourself, 
rather daringly, in the Mule's early life. You have been one of those who carried off his clown, 
who, incidentally, has not yet been found, and for which there will yet be full payment. Naturally, 
your ability is recognized and the Mule is not of those who fear the ability of his enemies as 
long as he can convert it into the ability of a new friend." 

"Is that what you're hedging up to? Oh, no!" 

"Oh, yes! It was the purpose of tonight's comedy. You are an intelligent man, yet your little 
conspiracies against die Mule fail humorously. You can scarcely dignify it with the name of 
conspiracy. Is it part of your military training to waste ships in hopeless actions?" 

"One must first admit them to be hopeless." 

"One will," the viceroy assured him, gently. "The Mule has conquered the Foundation, It is 
rapidly being turned into an arsenal for accomplishment of his greater aims." 

"What greater aims?" 



"The conquest of the entire Galaxy. The reunion of all the tom worlds into a new Empire. The 
fulfillment, you dull-witted patriot, of your own Seldon's dream seven hundred years before he 
hoped to see it. And in the fulfillment, you can help us." 

"I can, undoubtedly. But I won't, undoubtedly." 

"I understand," reasoned the viceroy, "that only three of the Independent Trading Worlds yet 
resist. They will not last much longer. It will be the last of all Foundation forces. You still hold 
out." 

"Yes." 

"Yet you won't. A voluntary recruit is the, most efficient. But the other kind will do. 

Unfortunately, the Mule is absent. He leads the fight, as always, against the resisting Traders. 
But he is in continual contact with us. You will not have to wait long." 

"For what?" 

"For your conversion. 

"The Mule," said the captain, frigidly, "will find that beyond his ability." 

"But he won't. I was not beyond it. You don't recognize me? Come, you were on Kalgan, so you 
have seen me. I wore a monocle, a fur-lined scarlet robe, a high-crowned hat-" 

The captain stiffened in dismay. "You were the warlord of Kalgan." 

"Yes. And now I am the loyal viceroy of the Mule. You see, he is persuasive." 


21. INTERLUDE IN SPACE 

The blockade was run successfully. In the vast volume of space, not all the navies ever in 
existence could keep their watch in tight proximity. Given a single ship, a skillful pilot, and a 
moderate degree of luck, and there are holes and to spare. 

With cold-eyed calm, Toran drove a protesting vessel from the vicinity of one star to that of 
another. If the neighborhood of great mass made an interstellar jump erratic and difficult, it also 
made the enemy detection devices useless or nearly so. 

And once the girdle of ships had been passed the inner sphere of dead space, through whose 
blockaded sub-ether no message could be driven, was passed as well. For the first time in over 
three months Toran felt unisolated. 

A week passed before the enemy news programs dealt with anything more than the dull, 
self-laudatory details of growing control over the Foundation. It was a week in which Toran's 
armored trading ship fled inward from the Periphery in hasty jumps. 

Ebling Mis called out to the pilot room and Toran rose blink-eyed from his charts. 

"What's the matter?" Toran stepped down into the small central chamber which Bayta had 



inevitably devised into a living room. 

Mis shook his head, "Bescuppered if I know. The Mule's newsmen are announcing a special 
bulletin. Thought you might want to get in on it." 

"Might as well. Where's Bayta?" 

"Setting the table in the diner and picking out a menuor some such frippery." 

Toran sat down upon the cot that served as Magnifico's bed, and waited. The propaganda 
routine of the Mule's "special bulletins" were monotonously similar. First the martial music, and 
then the buttery slickness of the announcer. The minor news items would come, following one 
another in patient lock step. Then the pause. Then the trumpets and the rising excitement and 
the climax. 

Toran endured it. Mis muttered to himself. 

The newscaster spilled out, in conventional war-correspondent phraseology, the unctuous 
words that translated into sound the molten metal and blasted flesh of a battle in space. 

"Rapid cruiser squadrons under Lieutenant General Sammin hit back hard today at the task 
force striking out from Iss-" The carefully expressionless face of the speaker upon the screen 
faded into the blackness of a space cut through by the quick swaths of ships reeling across 
emptiness in deadly battle. The voice continued through the soundless thunder 

"The most striking action of the battle was the subsidiary combat of the heavy cruiser Cluster 
against three enemy ships of the 'Nova' class-" 

The screen's view veered and closed in. A great ship sparked and one of the frantic attackers 
glowed angrily, twisted out of focus, swung back and rammed. The Cluster bowed wildly and 
survived the glancing blow that drove the attacker off in twisting reflection. 

The newsman's smooth unimpassioned delivery continued to the last blow and the last hulk. 

Then a pause, and a large similar voice-and-picture of the fight off Mnemon, to which the 
novelty was added of a lengthy description of a hit-and-run landing - the picture of a blasted 
city - huddled and weary prisoners - and off again. 

Mnemon had not long to live. 

The pause again - and this time the raucous sound of the expected brasses. The screen faded 
into the long, impressively soldier-lined corridor up which the government spokesman in 
councilor's uniform strode quickly. 

The silence was oppressive. 

The voice that came at last was solemn, slow and hard: "By order of our sovereign, it is 
announced that the planet, Haven, hitherto in warlike opposition to his will, has submitted to the 
acceptance of defeat. At this moment, the forces of our sovereign are occupying the planet. 
Opposition was scattered, unco-ordinated, and speedily crushed." 



The scene faded out, the original newsman returned to state importantly that other 
developments would be transmitted as they occurred. 

Then there was dance music, and Ebling Mis threw the shield that cut the power. 

Toran rose and walked unsteadily away, without a word. The psychologist made no move to 
stop him. 

When Bayta stepped out of the kitchen, Mis motioned silence. 

He said, "They've taken Haven." 

And Bayta said, "Already?" Her eyes were round, and sick with disbelief. 

"Without a fight. Without an unprin-" He stopped and swallowed. "You'd better leave Toran 
alone. It's not pleasant for him. Suppose we eat without him this once." 

Bayta looked once toward the pilot room, then turned hopelessly. "Very well!" 

Magnifico sat unnoticed at the table. He neither spoke nor ate but stared ahead with a 
concentrated fear that seemed to drain all the vitality out of his thread of a body. 

Ebling Mis pushed absently at his iced-fruit dessert and said, harshly, "Two Trading worlds 
fight. They fight, and bleed, and die and don't surrender. Only at Haven - Just as at the 
Foundation-" 

"But why? Why?" 

The psychologist shook his head. "It's of a piece with all the problem. Every queer facet is a 
hint at the nature of the Mule. First, the problem of how he could conquer the Foundation, with 
little blood, and at a single blow essentially - while the Independent Trading Worlds held out. 
The blanket on nuclear reactions was a puny weapon - we've discussed that back and forth till 
I'm sick of it - and it did not work on any but the Foundation. 

"Randu suggested," and Ebling's grizzly eyebrows pulled together, "it might have been a 
radiant Will-Depresser. It's what might have done the work on Haven. But then why wasn't it 
used on Mnemon and Iss - which even now fight with such demonic intensity that it is taking 
half the Foundation fleet in addition to the Mule's forces to beat them down. Yes, I recognized 
Foundation ships in the attack." 

Bayta whispered, "The Foundation, then Haven. Disaster seems to follow us, without touching. 
We always seem to get out by a hair. Will it last forever?" 

Ebling Mis was not listening. To himself, he was making a point. "But there's another problem - 
another problem. Bayta, you remember the news item that the Mule's clown was not found on 
Terminus; that it was suspected he had fled to Haven, or been carried there by his original 
kidnappers. There is an importance attached to him, Bayta, that doesn't fade, and we have not 
located it yet. Magnifico must know something that is fatal to the Mule. I'm sure of it. " 

Magnifico, white and stuttering, protested, "Sire ... noble lord ... indeed, I swear it is past my 
poor reckoning to penetrate your wants. I have told what I know to the utter limits, and with your 



probe, you have drawn out of my meager wit that which I knew, but knew not that I knew." 

"I know ... I know. It is something small. A hint so small that neither you nor I recognize it for 
what it is. Yet I must find it - for Mnemon and Iss will go soon, and when they do, we are the 
last remnants, the last droplets of the independent Foundation." 

The stars begin to cluster closely when the core of the Galaxy is penetrated. Gravitational fields 
begin to overlap at intensities sufficient to introduce perturbations in an interstellar jump that 
can not be overlooked. 

Toran became aware of that when a jump landed their ship in the full glare of a red giant which 
clutched viciously, and whose grip was loosed, then wrenched apart, only after twelve 
sleepless, soul-battering hours. 

With charts limited in scope, and an experience not at all fully developed, either operationally or 
mathematically, Toran resigned himself to days of careful plotting between jumps. 

It became a community project of a sort. Ebling Mis checked Toran's mathematics and Bayta 
tested possible routes, by the various generalized methods, for the presence of real solutions. 
Even Magnifico was put to work on the calculating machine for routine computations, a type of 
work, which, once explained, was a source of great amusement to him and at which he was 
surprisingly proficient. 

So at the end of a month, or nearly, Bayta was able to survey the red line that wormed its way 
through the ship's trimensional model of the Galactic Lens halfway to its center, and say with 
Satiric relish, "You know what it looks like. It looks like a ten-foot earth-worm with a terrific case 
of indigestion. Eventually, you'll land us back in Haven." 

"I will," growled Toran, with a fierce rustle of his chart, "if you don't shut up." 

"And at that," continued Bayta, "there is probably a route fight through, straight as a meridian of 
longitude." 

"Yeah? Well, in the first place, dimwit, it probably took five hundred ships five hundred years to 
work out that route by hit-and-miss, and my lousy half-credit charts don't give it. Besides, 
maybe those straight routes are a good thing to avoid. They're probably choked up with ships. 
And besides-" 

"Oh, for Galaxy's sake, stop driveling and slavering so much righteous indignation." Her hands 
were in his hair. 

He yowled, "Ouch! Let go!" seized her wrists and whipped downward, whereupon Toran, Bayta, 
and chair formed a tangled threesome on the floor. It degenerated into a panting wrestling 
match, composed mostly of choking laughter and various foul blows. 

Toran broke loose at Magnifico's breathless entrance. 

"What is it?" 

The lines of anxiety puckered the clown's face and tightened the skin whitely over the 
enormous bridge of his nose. "The instruments are behaving queerly, sir. I have not, in the 



knowledge of my ignorance, touched anything-" 

In two seconds, Toran was in the pilot room. He said quietly to Magnifico, "Wake up Ebling Mis. 
Have him come down here." 

He said to Bayta, who was trying to get a basic order back to her hair by use of her fingers, 
"We've been detected, Bay." 

"Detected?" And Bayta's arms dropped. "By whom?" 

"Galaxy knows," muttered Toran, "but I imagine by someone with blasters already ranged and 
trained." 

He sat down and in a low voice was already sending into the sub-ether the ship's identification 
code. 

And when Ebling Mis entered, bathrobed and blear-eyed, Toran said with a desperate calm, "It 
seems we're inside the borders of a local Inner Kingdom which is called the Autarchy of Filia." 

"Never heard of it," said Mis, abruptly. 

"Well, neither did I," replied Toran, "but we're being stopped by a Filian ship just the same, and 
I don't know what it will involve." 

The captain-inspector of the Filian ship crowded aboard with six armed men following him. He 
was short, thin-haired, thin-lipped, and dry-skinned. He coughed a sharp cough as he sat down 
and threw open the folio under his arm to a blank page. 

"Your passports and ship's clearance, please." 

"We have none," said Toran. 

"None, hey?" he snatched up a microphone suspended from his belt and spoke into it quickly, 
"Three men and one woman. Papers not in order." He made an accompanying notation in the 
folio. 

He said, "Where are you from?" 

"Siwenna," said Toran warily. 

"Where is that?" 

"Thirty thousand parsecs, eighty degrees west Trantor, forty degrees-" 

"Never mind, never mind!" Toran could see that his inquisitor had written down: "Point of origin 
- Periphery." 

The Filian continued, "Where are you going?" 

Toran said, "Trantor sector." 

"Purpose?" 



"Pleasure trip." 

"Carrying any cargo?" 

"No." 

"Hm-m-m. We'll check on that." He nodded and two men jumped to activity. Toran made no 
move to interfere. 

"What brings you into Filian territory?" The Filian's eyes gleamed unamiably. 

"We didn't know we were. I lack a proper chart." 

"You will be required to pay a hundred credits for that lack - and, of course, the usual fees 
required for tariff duties, et cetera." 

He spoke again into the microphone - but listened more than he spoke. Then, to Toran, "Know 
anything about nuclear technology?" 

"A little," replied Toran, guardedly. 

"Yes?" The Filian closed his folio, and added, "The men of the Periphery have a knowledgeable 
reputation that way. Put on a suit and come with me." 

Bayta stepped forward, "What are you going to do with him?" 

Toran put her aside gently, and asked coldly, "Where do you want me to come?" 

"Our power plant needs minor adjustments. He'll come with you." His pointing finger aimed 
directly at Magnifico, whose brown eyes opened wide in a blubbery dismay. 

"What's he got to do with it?" demanded Toran fiercely. 

The official looked up coldly. "I am informed of pirate activities in this vicinity. A description of 
one of the known thugs tallies roughly. It is a purely routine matter of identification. " 

Toran hesitated, but six men and six blasters are eloquent arguments. He reached into the 
cupboard for the suits. 

An hour later, he rose upright in the bowels of the Filian ship and raged, "There's not a thing 
wrong with the motors that I can see. The busbars are true, the L-tubes are feeding properly 
and the reaction analysis checks. Who's in charge here?" 

The head engineer said quietly, "I am." 

"Well, get me out of here-" 

He was led to the officers' level and the small anteroom held only an indifferent ensign. 

"Where's the man who came with me?" 

"Please wait," said the ensign. 

It was fifteen minutes later that Magnifico was brought in. 



"What did they do to you?" asked Toran quickly. 

"Nothing. Nothing at all." Magnifico's head shook a slow negative. 

It took two hundred and fifty credits to fulfill the demands of Filia - fifty credits of it for instant 
release - and they were in free space again. 

Bayta said with a forced laugh, "Don't we rate an escort? Don't we get the usual figurative boot 
over the border?" 

And Toran replied, grimly, "That was no Filian ship - and we're not leaving for a while. Come in 
here." 

They gathered about him. 

Fie said, whitely, "That was a Foundation ship, and those were the Mule's men aboard." 

Ebling bent to pick up the cigar he had dropped. Fie said, "Flere? We're fifteen thousand 
parsecs from the Foundation. " 

"And we're here. What's to prevent them from making the same trip. Galaxy, Ebling, don't you 
think I can tell ships apart? I saw their engines, and that's enough for me. I tell you it was a 
Foundation engine in a Foundation ship." 

"And how did they get here?" asked Bayta, logically. "What are the chances of a random 
meeting of two given ships in space?" 

"What's that to do with it?" demanded Toran, hotly. "It would only show we've been followed." 
"Followed?" hooted Bayta. "Through hyperspace?" 

Ebling Mis interposed wearily, "That can be done - given a good ship and a great pilot. But the 
possibility doesn't impress me." 

"I haven't been masking my trail," insisted Toran. "I've been building up take-off speed on the 
straight. A blind man could have calculated our route." 

"The blazes he could," cried Bayta. "With the cockeyed jumps you are making, observing our 
initial direction didn't mean a thing. We came out of the jump wrong-end forwards more than 
once." 

"We're wasting time," blazed Toran, with gritted teeth. "It's a Foundation ship under the Mule. 
It's stopped us. It's searched us. It's had Magnifico - alone - with me as hostage to keep the 
rest of you quiet, in case you suspected. And we're going to bum it out of space right now." 

"Flold on now," and Ebling Mis clutched at him. "Are you going to destroy us for one ship you 
think is an enemy? Think, man, would those scuppers chase us over an impossible route half 
through the bestinkered Galaxy, look us over, and then let us go?' 

"They're still interested in where we're going." 

"Then why stop us and put us on our guard? You can't have it both ways, you know." 



"I'll have it my way. Let go of me, Ebling, or I'll knock you down." 

Magnifico leaned forward from his balanced perch on his favorite chair back. His long nostrils 
flared with excitement. "I crave your pardon for my interruption, but my poor mind is of a 
sudden plagued with a queer thought." 

Bayta anticipated Toran's gesture of annoyance, and added her grip to Ebling's. "Go ahead and 
speak, Magnifico. We will all listen faithfully." 

Magnifico said, "In my stay in their ship what addled wits I have were bemazed and bemused 
by a chattering fear that befell men. Of a truth I have a lack of memory of most that happened. 
Many men staring at me, and talk I did not understand. But towards the last - as though a 
beam of sunlight had dashed through a cloud rift - there was a face I knew. A glimpse, the 
merest glimmer - and yet it glows in my memory ever stronger and brighter." 

Toran said, "Who was it?" 

"That captain who was with us so long a time ago, when first you saved me from slavery." 

It had obviously been Magnifico's intention to create a sensation, and the delighted smile that 
curled broadly in the shadow of his proboscis, attested to his realization of the intention's 
success. 

"Captain ... Han ... Pritcher?" demanded Mis, sternly. "You're sure of that? Certain sure now?" 

"Sir, I swear," and he laid a bone-thin hand upon his narrow chest. "I would uphold the truth of it 
before the Mule and swear it in his teeth, though all his power were behind him to deny it." 

Bayta said in pure wonder, "Then what's it all about?" The clown faced her eagerly, "My lady, I 
have a theory. It came upon me, ready made, as though the Galactic Spirit had gently laid it in 
my mind." He actually raised his voice above Toran's interrupting objection. 

"My lady," he addressed himself exclusively to Bayta, "if this captain had, like us, escaped with 
a ship; if he, like us, were on a trip for a purpose of his own devising; if he blundered upon us - 
he would suspect us of following and waylaying him, as we suspect him of the like. What 
wonder he played this comedy to enter our ship?" 

"Why would he want us in his ship, then?" demanded Toran. "That doesn't fit." 

"Why, yes, it does," clamored the clown, with a flowing inspiration. "He sent an underling who 
knew us not, but who described us into his microphone. The listening captain would be struck 
at my own poor likeness - for, of a truth there are not many in this great Galaxy who bear a 
resemblance to my scantiness. I was the proof of the identity of the rest of you." 

"And so he leaves us?" 

"What do we know of his mission, and the secrecy thereof? lie has spied us out for not an 
enemy and having it done so, must he needs think it wise to risk his plan by widening the 
knowledge thereof?" 

Bayta said slowly, "Don't be stubborn, Torie. It does explain things." 



"It could be," agreed Mis. 

Toran seemed helpless in the face of united resistance. Something in the clown's fluent 
explanations bothered him. Something was wrong. Yet he was bewildered and, in spite of 
himself, his anger ebbed. 

"For a while," he whispered, "I thought we might have had one of the Mule's ships." 

And his eyes were dark with the pain of Haven's loss. 

The others understood. 


22. DEATH ON NEOTRANTOR 

NEOTRANTOR The small planet of Dellcass, renamed after the Great Sack, was for nearly a 
century, the seat of the last dynasty of the First Empire. It was a shadow world and a shadow 
Empire and Its existence Is only of legalistic importance. Under the first of the Neotrantorlan 
dynasty.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Neotrantor was the name! New Trantor! And when you have said the name you have 
exhausted at a stroke all the resemblances of the new Trantor to the great original. Two 
parsecs away, the sun of Old Trantor still shone and the Galaxy's Imperial Capital of the 
previous century still cut through space in the silent and eternal repetition of its orbit. 

Men even inhabited Old Trantor. Not many - a hundred million, perhaps, where fifty years 
before, forty billions had swarmed. The huge, metal world was in jagged splinters. The towering 
thrusts of the multi-towers from the single world-girdling base were torn and empty - still 
bearing the original blastholes and firegut - shards of the Great Sack of forty years earlier. 

It was strange that a world which had been the center of a Galaxy for two thousand years - that 
had ruled limitless space and been home to legislators and rulers whose whims spanned the 
parsecs - could die in a month. It was strange that a world which had been untouched through 
the vast conquering sweeps and retreats of a millennia, and equally untouched by the civil wars 
and palace revolutions of other millennia - should lie dead at last. It was strange that the Glory 
of the Galaxy should be a rotting corpse. 

And pathetic! 

For centuries would yet pass before the mighty works of fifty generations of humans would 
decay past use. Only the declining powers of men, themselves, rendered them useless now. 

The millions left after the billions had died tore up the gleaming metal base of the planet and 
exposed soil that had not felt the touch of sun in a thousand years. 

Surrounded by the mechanical perfections of human efforts, encircled by the industrial marvels 
of mankind freed of the tyranny of environment - they returned to the land. In the huge traffic 



clearings, wheat and corn grew. In the shadow of the towers, sheep grazed. 

But Neotrantor existed - an obscure village of a planet drowned in the shadow of mighty 
Trantor, until a heart-throttled royal family, racing before the fire and flame of the Great Sack 
sped to it as its last refuge - and held out there, barely, until the roaring wave of rebellion 
subsided. There it ruled in ghostly splendor over a cadaverous remnant of Imperium. 

Twenty agricultural worlds were a Galactic Empire! 

Dagobert IX, ruler of twenty worlds of refractory squires and sullen peasants, was Emperor of 
the Galaxy, Lord of the Universe. 

Dagobert IX had been twenty-five on the bloody day he arrived with his father upon Neotrantor. 
His eyes and mind were still alive with the glory and the power of the Empire that was. But his 
son, who might one day be Dagobert X, was born on Neotrantor. 

Twenty worlds were all he knew. 

Jord Commason's open air car was the finest vehicle of its type on all Neotrantor - and, after 
all, justly so. It did not end with the fact that Commason was the largest landowner on 
Neotrantor. It began there. For in earlier days he had been the companion and evil genius of a 
young crown prince, restive in the dominating grip of a middle-aged emperor. And now he was 
the companion and still the evil genius of a middle-aged crown prince who hated and 
dominated an old emperor. 

So Jord Commason, in his air car, which in mother-of-pearl finish and gold-and-lumetron 
ornamentation needed no coat of arms as owner's identification, surveyed the lands that were 
his, and the miles of rolling wheat that were his, and the huge threshers and harvesters that 
were his, and the tenant-farmers and machine-tenders that were his - and considered his 
problems cautiously. 

Beside him, his bent and withered chauffeur guided the ship gently through the upper winds 
and smiled. 

Jord Commason spoke to the wind, the air, and the sky, "You remember what I told you, 
Inchney?" 

Inchney's thin gray hair wisped lightly in the wind. His gap-toothed smile widened in its 
thin-lipped fashion and the vertical wrinkles of his cheeks deepened as though he were keeping 
an eternal secret from himself. The whisper of his voice whistled between his teeth. 

"I remember, sire, and I have thought." 

"And what have you thought, Inchney?" There was an impatience about the question. 

Inchney remembered that he had been young and handsome, and a lord on Old Trantor. 
Inchney remembered that he was a disfigured ancient on Neotrantor, who lived by grace of 
Squire Jord Commason, and paid for the grace by lending his subtlety on request. He sighed 
very softly. 

He whispered again, "Visitors from the Foundation, sire, are a convenient thing to have. 



Especially, sire, when they come with but a single ship, and but a single fighting man. How 
welcome they might be." 

"Welcome?" said Commason, gloomily. "Perhaps so. But those men are magicians and may be 
powerful." 

"Pugh," muttered Inchney, "the mistiness of distance hides the truth. The Foundation is but a 
world. Its citizens are but men. If you blast them, they die." 

Inchney held the ship on its course - A river was a winding sparkle below. He whispered, "And 
is there not a man they speak of now who stirs the worlds of the Periphery?" 

Commason was suddenly suspicious. "What do you know of this?" 

There was no smile on his chauffeur's face. "Nothing, sire. It was but an idle question." 

The squire's hesitation was short. He said, with brutal directness, "Nothing you ask is idle, and 
your method of acquiring knowledge will have your scrawny neck in a vise yet. But - I have it! 
This man is called the Mule, and a subject of his had been here some months ago on a ... 
matter of business. I await another ... now ... for its conclusion." 

"And these newcomers? They are not the ones you want, perhaps?" 

"They lack the identification they should have." 

"It has been reported that the Foundation has been captured-" 

"I did not tell you that." 

"It has been so reported," continued Inchney, coolly, "and if that is correct, then these may be 
refugees from the destruction, and may be held for the Mule's man out of honest friendship." 

"Yes?" Commason was uncertain. 

"And, sire, since it is well-known that the friend of a conqueror is but the last victim, it would be 
but a measure of honest self-defense. For there are such things as psychic probes, and here 
we have four Foundation brains. There is much about the Foundation it would be useful to 
know, much even about the Mule. And then the Mule's friendship would be a trifle the less 
overpowering." 

Commason, in the quiet of the upper air, returned with a shiver to his first thought. "But if the 
Foundation has not fallen. If the reports are lies. It is said that it has been foretold it can not 
fall." 

"We are past the age of soothsayers, sire." 

"And yet if it did not fall, Inchney. Think! If it did not fall. The Mule made me promises, indeed-" 
He had gone too far, and backtracked. "That is, he made boasts. But boasts are wind and 
deeds are hard." 


Inchney laughed noiselessly. "Deeds are hard indeed, until begun. One could scarcely find a 
further fear than a Galaxy-end Foundation." 



"There is still the prince," murmured Commason, almost to himself. 

"He deals with the Mule also, then, sire?" 

Commason could not quite choke down the complacent shift of features. "Not entirely. Not as / 
do. But he grows wilder, more uncontrollable. A demon is upon him. If I seize these people and 
he takes them away for his own use - for he does not lack a certain shrewdness - I am not yet 
ready to quarrel with him." He frowned and his heavy cheeks bent downwards with dislike. 

"I saw those strangers for a few moments yesterday," said the gray chauffeur, irrelevantly, "and 
it is a strange woman, that dark one. she walks with the freedom of a man and she is of a 
startling paleness against the dark luster of hair." There was almost a warmth in the husky 
whisper of the withered voice, so that Commason turned toward him in sudden surprise. 

Inchney continued, "The prince, I think, would not find his shrewdness proof against a 
reasonable compromise. You could have the rest, if you left him the girl-" 

A light broke upon Commason, "A thought! Indeed a thought! Inchney, turn back! And Inchney, 
if all turns well, we will discuss further this matter of your freedom." 

It was with an almost superstitious sense of symbolism that Commason found a Personal 
Capsule waiting for him in his private study when he returned. It had arrived by a wavelength 
known to few. Commason smiled a fat smile. The Mule's man was coming and the Foundation 
had indeed fallen. 

Bayta's misty visions, when she had them, of an Imperial palace, did not jibe with the reality, 
and inside her, there was a vague sense of disappointment. The room was small, almost plain, 
almost ordinary. The palace did not even match the mayor's residence back at the Foundation 
- and Dagobert IX - 

Bayta had definite ideas of what an emperor ought to look like. He ought not look like 
somebody's benevolent grandfather. He ought not be thin and white and faded - or serving 
cups of tea with his own hand in an expressed anxiety for the comfort of his visitors. 

But so it was. 

Dagobert IX chuckled as he poured tea into her stiffly outheld cup. 

"This is a great pleasure for me, my dear. It is a moment away from ceremony and courtiers. I 
have not had the opportunity for welcoming visitors from my outer provinces for a time now. My 
son takes care of these details now that I'm older. You haven't met my son? A fine boy. 
Headstrong, perhaps. But then he's young. Do you care for a flavor capsule? No?" 

Toran attempted an interruption, "Your imperial majesty-" 

"Yes?" 

"Your imperial majesty, it has not been our intention to intrude upon you-" 

"Nonsense, there is no intrusion. Tonight there will be the official reception, but until then, we 
are free. Let's see, where did you say you were from? It seems a long time since we had an 



official reception. You said you were from the Province of Anacreon?" 

"From the Foundation, your imperial majesty!" 

"Yes, the Foundation. I remember now. I had it located. It is in the Province of Anacreon. I have 
never been there. My doctor forbids extensive traveling. I don't recall any recent reports from 
my viceroy at Anacreon. Flow are conditions there?" he concluded anxiously. 

"Sire," mumbled Toran, "I bring no complaints." 

"That is gratifying. I will commend my viceroy." 

Toran looked helplessly at Ebling Mis, whose brusque voice rose. "Sire, we have been told that 
it will require your permission for us to visit the Imperial University Library on Trantor." 

"Trantor?" questioned the emperor, mildly, "Trantor?" 

Then a look of puzzled pain crossed his thin face. "Trantor?" he whispered. "I remember now. I 
am making plans now to return there with a flood of ships at my back. You shall come with me. 
Together we will destroy the rebel, Gilmer. Together we shall restore the empire!" 

His bent back had straightened. His voice had strengthened. For a moment his eyes were hard. 
Then, he blinked and said softly, "But Gilmer is dead. I seem to remember - Yes. Yes! Gilmer 
is dead! Trantor is dead - For a moment, it seemed - Where was it you said you came from?" 

Magnifico whispered to Bayta, "Is this really an emperor? For somehow I thought emperors 
were greater and wiser than ordinary men." 

Bayta motioned him quiet. She said, "If your imperial majesty would but sign an order permitting 
us to go to Trantor, it would avail greatly the common cause." 

"To Trantor?" The emperor was blank and uncomprehending. 

"Sire, the Viceroy of Anacreon, in whose name we speak, sends word that Gilmer is yet alive-" 
"Alive! Alive!" thundered Dagobert. "Where? It will be war!" 

"Your imperial majesty, it must not yet be known. His whereabouts are uncertain. The viceroy 
sends us to acquaint you of the fact, and it is only on Trantor that we may find his hiding place. 
Once discovered-" 

"Yes, yes - Fie must be found-" The old emperor doddered to the wall and touched the little 
photocell with a trembling finger. Fie muttered, after an ineffectual pause, "My servants do not 
come. I can not wait for them." 

Fie was scribbling on a blank sheet, and ended with a flourished "D." Fie said, "Gilmer will yet 
learn the power of his emperor. Where was it you came from? Anacreon? What are the 
conditions there? Is the name of the emperor powerful?" 

Bayta took the paper from his loose fingers, "Your imperial majesty is beloved by the people. 
Your love for them is widely known." 



"I shall have to visit my good people of Anacreon, but my doctor says ... I don't remember what 
he says, but-" He looked up, his old gray eyes sharp, "Were you saying something of Gilmer?" 

"No, your imperial majesty." 

"He shall not advance further. Go back and tell your people that. Trantor shall hold! My father 
leads the fleet now, and the rebel vermin Gilmer shall freeze in space with his regicidal rabble." 

He staggered into a seat and his eyes were blank once more. "What was I saying?" 

Toran rose and bowed low, "Your imperial majesty has been kind to us, but the time allotted us 
for an audience is over. " 

For a moment, Dagobert IX looked like an emperor indeed as he rose and stood stiff-backed 
while, one by one, his visitors retreated backward through the door 

-to where twenty armed men intervened and locked a circle about them. 

A hand-weapon flashed- 

To Bayta, consciousness returned sluggishly, but without the "Where am I?" sensation. She 
remembered clearly the odd old man who called himself emperor, and the other men who 
waited outside. The arthritic tingle in her finger joints meant a stun pistol. 

She kept her eyes closed, and listened with painful attention to the voices. 

There were two of them. One was slow and cautious, with a slyness beneath the surface 
obsequity. The other was hoarse and thick, almost sodden, and blurted out in viscous spurts. 
Bayta liked neither. 

The thick voice was predominant. 

Bayta caught the last words, "He will live forever, that old madman. It wearies me. It annoys 
me. Commason, I will have it. I grow older, too." 

"Your highness, let us first see of what use these people are. It may be we shall have sources 
of strength other than your father still provides." 

The thick voice was lost in a bubbling whisper. Bayta caught only the phrase, " -the girl-" but 
the other, fawning voice was a nasty, low, running chuckle followed by a comradely, 
near-patronizing, "Dagobert, you do not age. They lie who say you are not a youth of twenty." 

They laughed together, and Bayta's blood was an icy trickle. Dagobert - your highness - The 
old emperor had spoken of a headstrong son, and the implication of the whispers now beat 
dully upon her. But such things didn't happen to people in real life 

Toran's voice broke upon her in a slow, hard current of cursing. 

She opened her eyes, and Toran's, which were upon her, showed open relief. He said, fiercely, 
"This banditry will be answered by the emperor. Release us." 

It dawned upon Bayta that her wrists and ankles were fastened to wall and floor by a tight 



attraction field. 


Thick Voice approached Toran. He was paunchy, his lower eyelids puffed darkly, and his hair 
was thinning out. There was a gay feather in his peaked hat, and the edging of his doublet was 
embroidered with silvery metal-foam. 

He sneered with a heavy amusement. "The emperor? The poor, mad emperor?" 

"I have his pass. No subject may hinder our freedom." 

"But I am no subject, space-garbage. I am the regent and crown prince and am to be 
addressed as such. As for my poor silly father, it amuses him to see visitors occasionally. And 
we humor him. It tickles his mock-imperial fancy. But, of course, it has no other meaning." 

And then he was before Bayta, and she looked up at him contemptuously. He leaned close and 
his breath was overpoweringly minted. 

He said, "Her eyes suit well, Commason - she is even prettier with them open. I think she'll do. 
It will be an exotic dish for a jaded taste, eh?" 

There was a futile surge upwards on Toran's part, which the crown prince ignored and Bayta 
felt the iciness travel outward to the skin. Ebling Mis was still out; head lolling weakly upon his 
chest, but, with a sensation of surprise, Bayta noted that Magnifico's eyes were open, sharply 
open, as though awake for many minutes. Those large brown eyes swiveled towards Bayta and 
stared at her out of a doughy face. 

He whimpered, and nodded with his head towards the crown prince, "That one has my 
Visi-Sonor." 

The crown prince turned sharply toward the new voice, "This is yours, monster?" He swung the 
instrument from his shoulder where it had hung, suspended by its green strap, unnoticed by 
Bayta. 

He fingered it clumsily, tried to sound a chord and got nothing for his pains, "Can you play it, 
monster?" 

Magnifico nodded once. 

Toran said suddenly, "You've rifled a ship of the Foundation. If the emperor will not avenge, the 
Foundation will." 

It was the other, Commason, who answered slowly, "What Foundation? Or is the Mule no 
longer the Mule?" 

There was no answer to that. The prince's grin showed large uneven teeth. The clown's binding 
field was broken and he was nudged ungently to his feet. The Visi-Sonor was thrust into his 
hand. 

"Play for us, monster," said the prince. "Play us a serenade of love and beauty for our foreign 
lady here. Tell her that my father's country prison is no palace, but that I can take her to one 
where she can swim in rose water - and know what a prince's love is. Sing of a prince's love, 



monster. 


He placed one thick thigh upon a marble table and swung a leg idly, while his fatuous smiling 
stare swept Bayta into a silent rage. Toran's sinews strained against the field, in painful, 
perspiring effort. Ebling Mis stirred and moaned. 

Magnifico gasped, "My fingers are of useless stiffness-" 

"Play, monster!" roared the prince. The lights dimmed at a gesture to Commason and in the 
dimness he crossed his arms and waited. 

Magnifico drew his fingers in rapid, rhythmic jumps from end to end of the multikeyed 
instrument - and a sharp, gliding rainbow of light jumped across the room. A low, soft tone 
sounded - throbbing, tearful. It lifted in sad laughter, and underneath it there sounded a dull 
tolling. 

The darkness seemed to intensify and grow thick. Music reached Bayta through the muffled 
folds of invisible blankets. Gleaming light reached her from the depths as though a single 
candle glowed at the bottom of a pit. 

Automatically, her eyes strained. The light brightened, but remained blurred. It moved fuzzily, in 
confused color, and the music was suddenly brassy, evil - flourishing in high crescendo. The 
light flickered quickly, in swift motion to the wicked rhythm. Something writhed within the light. 
Something with poisonous metallic scales writhed and yawned. And the music writhed and 
yawned with it. 

Bayta struggled with a strange emotion and then caught herself in a mental gasp. Almost, it 
reminded her of the time in the Time Vault, of those last days on Haven. It was that horrible, 
cloying, clinging spiderweb of horror and despair. She shrunk beneath it oppressed. 

The music dinned upon her, laughing horribly, and the writhing terror at the wrong end of the 
telescope in the small circle of light was lost as she turned feverishly away. Her forehead was 
wet and cold. 

The music died. It must have lasted fifteen minutes, and a vast pleasure at its absence flooded 
Bayta. Light glared, and Magnifico's face was close to hers, sweaty, wild-eyed, lugubrious. 

"My lady," he gasped, "how fare you?" 

"Well enough," she whispered, "but why did you play like that?" 

She became aware of the others in the room. Toran and Mis were limp and helpless against 
the wall, but her eyes skimmed over them. There was the prince, lying strangely still at the foot 
of the table. There was Commason, moaning wildly through an open, drooling mouth. 

Commason flinched, and yelled mindlessly, as Magnifico took a step towards him. 

Magnifico turned, and with a leap, turned the others loose. 

Toran lunged upwards and with eager, taut fists seized the landowner by the neck, "You come 
with us. We'll want you - to make sure we get to our ship." 



Two hours later, in the ship's kitchen, Bayta served a walloping homemade pie, and Magnifico 
celebrated the return to space by attacking it with a magnificent disregard of table manners. 

"Good, Magnifico?" 

"Um-m-m-m!" 

"Magnifico?" 

"Yes, my lady?" 

"What was it you played back there?" 

The clown writhed, "I ... I'd rather not say. I learned it once, and the Visi-Sonor is of an effect 
upon the nervous system most profound. Surely, it was an evil thing, and not for your sweet 
innocence, my lady." 

"Oh, now, come, Magnifico. I'm not as innocent as that. Don't flatter so. Did I see anything like 
what f/7eysaw?" 

"I hope not. I played it for them only. If you saw, it was but the rim of it - from afar." 

"And that was enough. Do you know you knocked the prince out?" 

Magnifico spoke grimly through a large, muffling piece of pie. "I killed h\rr\, my lady." 

"What?" She swallowed, painfully. 

"He was dead when I stopped, or I would have continued. I cared not for Commason. His 
greatest threat was death or torture. But, my lady, this prince looked upon you wickedly, and-" 
he choked in a mixture of indignation and embarrassment. 

Bayta felt strange thoughts come and repressed them sternly. "Magnifico, you've got a gallant 
soul." 

"Oh, my lady." He bent a red nose into his pie, but, somehow did not eat. 

Ebling Mis stared out the port. Trantor was near - its metallic shine fearfully bright. Toran was 
standing there, too. 

He said with dull bitterness, "We've come for nothing, Ebling. The Mule's man precedes us." 

Ebling Mis rubbed his forehead with a hand that seemed shriveled out of its former plumpness. 
His voice was an abstracted mutter. 

Toran was annoyed. "I say those people know the Foundation has fallen. I say-" 

"Eh?" Mis looked up, puzzled. Then, he placed a gentle hand upon Toran's wrist, in complete 
oblivion of any previous conversation, "Toran, I ... I've been looking at Trantor. Do you know ... I 
have the queerest feeling ... ever since we arrived on Neotrantor. It's an urge, a driving urge 
that's pushing and pushing inside. Toran, I can do it; I know I can do it. Things are becoming 
clear in my mind - they have never been so clear." 



Toran stared - and shrugged. The words brought him no confidence. 

He said, tentatively, "Mis?" 

"Yes?" 

"You didn't see a ship come down on Neotrantor as we left?" 

Consideration was brief. "No." 

"I did. Imagination, I suppose, but it could have been that Filian ship." 

"The one with Captain Han Pritcher on it?" 

"The one with space knows who upon it. Magnifico's information - It followed us here, Mis." 
Ebling Mis said nothing, 

Toran said strenuously, "is there anything wrong with you? Aren't you well?" 

Mis's eyes were thoughtful, luminous, and strange. He did not answer. 


23. THE RUINS OF TRANTOR 

The location of an objective upon the great world of Trantor presents a problem unique in the 
Galaxy. There are no continents or oceans to locate from a thousand miles distance. There are 
no rivers, lakes, and islands to catch sight of through the cloud rifts. 

The metal-covered world was - had been - one colossal city, and only the old Imperial palace 
could be identified readily from outer space by a stranger. The Bayta circled the world at almost 
air-car height in repeated painful search. 

From polar regions, where the icy coating of the metal spires were somber evidence of the 
breakdown or neglect of the weather-conditioning machinery, they worked southwards. 
Occasionally they could experiment with the correlations -(or presumable correlations)- 
between what they saw and what the inadequate map obtained at Neotrantor showed. 

But it was unmistakable when it came. The gap in the metal coat of the planet was fifty miles. 
The unusual greenery spread over hundreds of square miles, inclosing the mighty grace of the 
ancient Imperial residences. 

The Bayta hovered and slowly oriented itself. There were only the huge supercauseways to 
guide them. Long straight arrows on the map, smooth, gleaming ribbons there below them. 

What the map indicated to be the University area was reached by dead reckoning, and upon 
the flat area of what once must have been a busy landing-field, the ship lowered itself. 

It was only as they submerged into the welter of metal that the smooth beauty apparent from 
the air dissolved into the broken, twisted near-wreckage that had been left in the wake of the 
Sack. Spires were truncated, smooth walls gouted and twisted, and just for an instant there was 



the glimpse of a shaven area of earth - perhaps several hundred acres in extent - dark and 
plowed. 

Lee Senter waited as the ship settled downward cautiously. It was a strange ship, not from 
Neotrantor, and inwardly he sighed. Strange ships and confused dealings with the men of outer 
space could mean the end of the short days of peace, a return to the old grandiose times of 
death and battle. Senter was leader of the group; the old books were in his charge and he had 
read of those old days. He did not want them. 

Perhaps ten minutes spent themselves as the strange ship came down to nestle upon the 
flatness, but long memories telescoped themselves in that time. There was first the great farm 
of his childhood - that remained in his mind merely as busy crowds of people. Then there was 
the trek of the young families to new lands. He was ten, then; an only child, puzzled, and 
frightened. 

Then the new buildings; the great metal slabs to be uprooted and tom aside; the exposed soil 
to be turned, and freshened, and invigorated; neighboring buildings to be tom down and 
leveled; others to be transformed to living quarters. 

There were crops to be grown and harvested; peaceful relations with neighboring farms to be 
established- 

There was growth and expansion, and the quiet efficiency of self-rule. There was the coming of 