
And the blaster prodded, though in the face that confront Channis only the cold glitter of the 
eyes betrayed the growing anger: "Because you are in the pay of the Second Foundation." 



"Pay?"- infinite contempt. "Prove that." 

"Or under the mental influence." 

"Without the Mule's knowledge? Ridiculous." 

"With the Mule's knowledge. Exactly my point, my you dullard. With the Mule's knowledge. Do 
you suppose else that you would be given a ship to play with? You led us to the Second 
Foundation as you were supposed to do." 

"I thresh a kernel of something or other out of this immensity of chaff. May I ask why I'm 
supposed to be doing all this? If were a traitor, why should I lead you to the Second 
Foundation? Why not hither and yon through the Galaxy, skipping gaily, finding no more than 
you ever did?' 

"For the sake of the ship. And because the men of the Second Foundation quite obviously need 
atomic warfare for self-defense." 

'You'll have to do better than that. One ship won't mean thing to them, and if they think they'll 
learn science from it a build atomic power plants next year, they are very, very simple Second 
Foundationers, indeed. On the order of simplicity as yourself, I should say." 

"You will have the opportunity to explain that to the Mule." 

"We're going back to Kalgan?" 

"On the contrary. We're staying here. And the Mule will join us in fifteen minutes - more or less. 
Do you think he hasn't followed us, my sharp-witted, nimble-minded lump of self-admiration? 
You have played the decoy well in reverse. You may not have led our victims to us, but you 
have certainly led us to our victims." 

"May I sit down," said Channis, "and explain something to you in picture drawings? Please." 
"You will remain standing." 

At that, I can say it as well standing. You think the Mule followed us because of the hypertracer 
on the communication circuit?" 

The blaster might have wavered. Channis wouldn't have sworn to it. Fie said: "You don't look 
surprised. But I don't waste time doubting that you feel surprised. Yes, I knew about it. And 
now, having shown you that I knew of something you didn't think I did, I'll tell you something 
you don't know, that I know you don't." 

"You allow yourself too many preliminaries, Channis. I should think your sense of invention was 
more smoothly greased. 

"There's on invention to this. There have been traitors, of course, or enemy agents, if you prefer 
that term. But the Mule knew of that in a rather curious way. It seems, you see, that some of his 
Converted men had been tampered with." 

The blaster did waver that time. Unmistakably. 



"I emphasize that, Pritcher. It was why he needed me. I was an Unconverted man. Didn't he 
emphasize to you that he needed an Unconverted? Whether he gave you the real reason or 
not?" 

"Try something else, Channis. If I were against the Mule, I'd know it." Quietly, rapidly, Pritcher 
was feeling his mind. It felt the same. It felt the same. Obviously the man was lying. 

"You mean you feel loyal to the Mule. Perhaps. Loyalty wasn't tampered with. Too easily 
detectable, the Mule said. But how do you feel mentally? Sluggish? Since you started this trip, 
have you always felt normal? Or have you felt strange sometimes, as though you weren't quite 
yourself? What are you trying to do, bore a hole through me without touching the trigger?" 

Pritcher withdrew his blaster half an inch, "What are you trying to say?" 

"I say that you've been tampered with. You've been handled. You didn't see the Mule install that 
hypertracer. You didn't see anyone do it. You just found it there, and assumed it was the Mule, 
and ever since you've been assuming he was following us. Sure, the wrist receiver you're 
wearing contacts the ship on a wave length mine isn't good for. Do you think I didn't know 
that?" He was speaking quickly now, angrily. His cloak of indifference had dissolved into 
savagery. "But it's not the Mule that's coming toward us from out there. It's not the Mule." 

"Who, if not?" 

"Well, who do you suppose? I found that hypertracer, the day we left. But I didn't think it was 
the Mule. He had no reason for indirection at that point. Don't you see the nonsense of it? If I 
were a traitor and he knew that, I could be Converted as easily as you were, and he would 
have the secret of the location of the Second Foundation out of my mind without sending me 
half across the Galaxy. Can you keep a secret from the Mule? And if / didn't know, then I 
couldn't lead him to it. So why send me in either case? 

"Obviously, that hypertracer must have been put there by an agent of the Second Foundation. 
That's who's coming towards us now. And would you have been fooled if your precious mind 
hadn't been tampered with? What kind of normality have you that you imagine immense folly to 
be wisdom? Me bring a ship to the Second Foundation? What would they do with a ship? 

"It's you they want, Pritcher. You know more about the Union than anyone but the Mule, and 
you're not dangerous to them while he is. That’s why they put the direction of search into my 
mind. Of course, it was completely impossible for me to find Tazenda by random searchings of 
the Lens. I knew that. But I knew there was the Second Foundation after us, and I knew they 
engineered it. Why not play their game? It was a battle of bluffs. They wanted us and I wanted 
their location - and space take the one that couldn't outbluff the other. 

"But it's we that will lose as long as you hold that blaster on me. And it obviously isn't your idea. 
It's theirs. Give me the blaster, Pritcher. I know it seems wrong to you, but it isn't your mind 
speaking, it's the Second Foundation within you. Give me the blaster, Pritcher, and we’ll face 
what's coming now, together." 

Pritcher, faced a growing confusion in horror. Plausibility! Could he be so wrong? Why this 
eternal doubt of himself? Why wasn't he sure? What made Channis sound so plausible? 



Plausibility! 

Or was it his own tortured mind fighting the invasion of the alien. 

Was he split in two? 

Hazily, he saw Channis standing before him, hand outstretched - and suddenly, he knew he 
was going to give him the blaster. 

And as the muscles of his arm were on the point of contracting in the proper manner to do so, 
the door opened, not hastily, behind him - and he turned. 

There are perhaps men in the Galaxy who can be confused for one another even by men at 
their peaceful leisure. Correspondingly, there may be conditions of mind when even unlikely 
pairs may be mis-recognized. But the Mule rises above any combination of the two factors. 

Not all Pritcher's agony of mind prevented the instantaneous mental flood of cool vigor that 
engulfed him. 

Physically, the Mule could not dominate any situation. Nor did he dominate this one. 

He was rather a ridiculous figure in his layers of clothing that thickened him past his normality 
without allowing him to reach normal dimensions even so. His face was muffled and the usually 
dominant beak covered what was left in a cold-red prominence. 

Probably as a vision of rescue, no greater incongruity could exist. 

He said: "Keep your blaster, Pritcher." 

Then he turned to Channis, who had shrugged and seated himself: "The emotional context 
here seems rather confusing and considerably in conflict. What's this about someone other 
than myself following you?" 

Pritcher intervened sharply: "Was a hypertracer placed upon our ship by your orders, sir?" 

The Mule turned cool eyes upon him, "Certainly. Is it very likely that any organization in the 
Galaxy other than the Union of Worlds would have access to it?' 

"He said-" 

"Well, he's here, general. Indirect quotation is not necessary. Have you been saying anything, 
Channis?" 

"Yes. But mistakes apparently, sir. It has been my opinion that the tracer was put there by 
someone in the pay of the Second Foundation and that we had been led here for some 
purpose of theirs, which I was prepared to counter. I was under the further impression that the 
general was more or less in their hands." 

"You sound as if you think so no longer." 

"I'm afraid not. Or it would not have been you at the door." 

"Well, then, let us thresh this out." The Mule peeled off the outer layers of padded, and 



electrically heated clothing. "Do you mind if I sit down as well? Now - we are safe here and 
perfectly free of any danger of intrusion. No native of this lump of ice will have any desire to 
approach this place. I assure you of that," and there was a grim earnestness about his 
insistence upon his powers. 

Channis showed his disgust. "Why privacy? Is someone going to serve tea and bring out the 
dancing girls?" 

"Scarcely. What was this theory of yours, young man? A Second Foundationer was tracing you 
with a device which no one but I have and - how did you say you found this place?" 

"Apparently, sir, it seems obvious, in order to account for known facts, that certain notions have 
been put into my head-" 

"By these same Second Foundationers?" 

"No one else, I imagine." 

"Then it did not occur to you that if a Second Foundationer could force, or entice, or inveigle 
you into going to the Second Foundation for purposes of his own - and I assume you imagined 
he used methods similar to mine, though, mind you, I can implant only emotions, not ideas - it 
did not occur to you that if he could do that there was little necessity to put a hypertracer on 
you. 

And Channis looked up sharply and met his sovereign's large eyes with sudden startle. Pritcher 
grunted and a visible relaxation showed itself in his shoulders. 

"No," said Channis, "that hadn't occurred to me." 

"Or that if they were obliged to trace you, they couldn't feel capable of directing you, and that, 
undirected, you could have precious little chance of finding your way here as you did. Did that 
occur to you?" 

"That, neither." 

"Why not? Flas your intellectual level receded to a so-much-greater-than-probable degree?" 

"The only answer is a question, sir. Are you joining General Pritcher in accusing me of being a 
traitor?" 

"You have a defense in case I am?" 

"Only the one I presented to the general. If I were a traitor and knew the whereabouts of the 
Second Foundation, you could Convert me and learn the knowledge directly. If you felt it 
necessary to trace me, then I hadn't the knowledge beforehand and wasn't a traitor. So I 
answer your paradox with another." 

"Then your conclusion?" 

"That I am not a traitor." 

"To which I must agree, since your argument is irrefutable." 



"Then may I ask you why you had us secretly followed?" 

"Because to all the facts there is a third explanation. Both you and Pritcher explained some 
facts in your own individual ways, but not all. I - if you can spare me the time - will explain all. 
And in a rather short time, so there is little danger of boredom. Sit down, Pritcher, and give me 
your blaster. There is no danger of attack on us any longer. None from in here and none from 
out there. None in fact even from the Second Foundation. Thanks to you, Channis." 

The room was lit in the usual Rossemian fashion of electrically heated wire. A single bulb was 
suspended from the ceiling and in its dim yellow glow, the three cast their individual shadows. 

The Mule said: "Since I felt it necessary to trace Channis, it was obvious I expect to gain 
something thereby. Since he went to the Second Foundation with a startling speed and 
directness, we can reasonably assume that that was what I was expecting to happen. Since I 
did not gain the knowledge from him directly, something must have been preventing me. Those 
are the facts. Channis, of course, knows the answer. So do I. Do you see it, Pritcher?" 

And Pritcher said doggedly: "No, sir." 

"Then I’ll explain. Only one kind of man can both know the location of the Second Foundation 
and prevent me from learning it. Channis, I'm afraid you're a Second Foundationer yourself." 

And Channis' elbows rested on his knees as he leaned forward, and through stiff and angry lips 
said: "What is your direct evidence? Deduction has proven wrong twice today." 

"There is direct evidence, too, Channis. It was easy enough. I told you that my men had been 
tampered with. The tamperer must have been, obviously, someone who was a) Unconverted, 
and b) fairly close to the center of things. The field was large but not entirely unlimited. You 
were too successful, Channis. People liked you too much. You got along too well. I wondered- 

"And then I summoned you to take over this expedition and it didn't set you back. I watched 
your emotions. It didn't bother you. You overplayed the confidence there, Channis. No man of 
real competence could have avoided a dash of uncertainty at a job like that. Since your mind 
did avoid it, it was either a foolish one or a controlled one. 

It was easy to test the alternatives. I seized your mind at a moment of relaxation and filled it 
with grief for an instant and then removed it. You were angry afterwards with such 
accomplished art that I could have sworn it was a natural reaction, but for that which went first. 
For when I wrenched at your emotions, for just one instant, for one tiny instant before you could 
catch yourself, your mind resisted. It was all I needed to know. 

"No one could have resisted me, even for that tiny instant, without control similar to mine." 
Channis' voice was low and bitter: "Well, then? Now what?" 

"And now you die - as a Second Foundationer. Quite necessary, as I believe you realize." 

And once again Channis stared into the muzzle of a blaster. A muzzle guided this time by a 
mind, not like Pritcher's capable of offhand twisting to suit himself, but by one as mature as his 
own and as resistant to force as his own. 



And the period of time allotted him for a correction of events was small. 

What followed thereafter is difficult to describe by one with the normal complement of senses 
and the normal incapacity for emotional control. 

Essentially, this is what Channis realized in the tiny space of time involved in the pushing of the 
Mule's thumb upon the trigger contact. 

The Mule's current emotional makeup was one of a hard and polished determination, unmisted 
by hesitation in the least. Had Channis been sufficiently interested afterward to calculate the 
time involved from the determination to shoot to the arrival of the disintegrating energies, he 
might have realized that his leeway was about one-fifth of a second. 

That was barely time. 

What the Mule realized in that same tiny space of time was that the emotional potential of 
Channis' brain had surged suddenly upwards without his own mind feeling any impact and that, 
simultaneously, a flood of pure, thrilling hatred cascaded upon him from an unexpected 
direction. 

It was that new emotional element that jerked his thumb off the contact. Nothing else could 
have done it, and almost together with his change of action, came complete realization of the 
new situation. 

It was a tableau that endured far less than the significance adhering to it should require from a 
dramatic standpoint. There was the Mule, thumb off the blaster, staring intently upon Channis 
There was Channis taut, not quite daring to breathe yet. And there was Pritcher, convulsed in 
his chair; every muscle at a spasmodic breaking point; every tendon writhing in an effort to hurl 
forward; his face twisted at last out of schooled woodenness into an unrecognizable death 
mask of horrid hate; and his eyes only and entirely and supremely upon the Mule. 

Only a word or two passed between Channis and the Mule - only a word or two and that utterly 
revealing stream of emotional consciousness that remains forever the true interplay of 
understanding between such as they. For the sake of our own limits, it is necessary to translate 
into words what went on, then, and thenceforward. 

Channis said, tensely: "You’re between two fires, First Citizen. You can't control two minds 
simultaneously, not when one of them is mine - so you have your choice. Pritcher, is free of 
your Conversion now. I've snapped the bonds. He's the old Pritcher; the one who tried to kill 
you once; the one who thinks you're the enemy of all that is free and right and holy; and he's 
the one besides who knows that you've debased him to helpless adulation for five years. I'm 
holding him back now by suppressing his will, but if you kill me, that ends, and in considerably 
less time than you could shift your blaster or even your will - he will kill you." 

The Mule quite plainly realized that. He did not move. 

Channis continued: "If you turn to place him under control, to kill him, to do anything, you won't 
ever be quick enough to turn again to stop me." 

The Mule still did not move. Only a soft sigh of realization. 



"So," said Channis, "throw down the blaster, and let us be on even terms again, and you can 
have Pritcher back." 


"I made a mistake," said the Mule, finally. "It was wrong to have a third party present when I 
confronted you. It introduced one variable too many. It is a mistake that must be paid for, I 
suppose." 

He dropped the blaster carelessly, and kicked it to the other end of the room. Simultaneously, 
Pritcher crumpled into profound sleep. 

"He’ll be normal when he awakes," said the Mule, indifferently. 

The entire exchange from the time the Mule's thumb had begun pressing the trigger-contact to 
the time he dropped the blaster had occupied just under a second and a half of time. 

But just beneath the borders of consciousness, for a time just above the borders of detection, 
Channis caught a fugitive emotional gleam in the Mule's mind. And it was still one of sure and 
confident triumph. 


6 

One Man, the Mule - and Another 

Two men, apparently relaxed and entirely at ease, poles apart physically - with every nerve 
that served as emotional detector quivering tensely. 

The Mule, for the first time in long years, had insufficient surety of his own way. Channis knew 
that, though he could protect himself for the moment, it was an effort - and that the attack upon 
him was none such for his opponent. In a test of endurance, Channis knew he would lose. 

But it was deadly to think of that. To give away to the Mule an emotional weakness would be to 
hand him a weapon. There was already that glimpse of something - a winner's something - in 
the Mule's mind. 

To gain time- 

Why did the others delay? Was that the source of the Mule's confidence? What did his 
opponent know that he didn't? The mind he watched told nothing. If only he could read ideas. 
And yet- 

Channis braked his own mental whirling roughly. There was only that; to gain time- 

Channis said: "Since it is decided, and not denied by myself after our little duel over Pritcher, 
that I am a Second Foundationer, suppose you tell me why I came to Tazenda." 

"Oh, no," and the Mule laughed, with high-pitched confidence, "I am not Pritcher. I need make 
no explanations to you. You had what you thought were reasons. Whatever they were, your 
actions suited me, and so I inquire no further." 



"Yet there must be such gaps in your conception of the story. Is Tazenda the Second 
Foundation you expected to find? Pritcher spoke much of your other attempt at finding it, and of 
your psychologist tool, Ebling Mis. He babbled a bit sometimes under my ... uh ... slight 
encouragement. Think back on Ebling Mis, First Citizen." 

"Why should I?" Confidence! 

Channis felt that confidence edge out into the open, as if with the passage of time, any anxiety 
the Mule might be having was increasingly vanishing. 

He said, firmly restraining the rush of desperation: "You lack curiosity, then? Pritcher told me of 
Mis' vast surprise at something. There was his terribly drastic urging for speed, for a rapid 
warning of the Second Foundation? Why? Why? Ebling Mis died. The Second Foundation was 
not warned. And yet the Second Foundation exists." 

The Mule smiled in real pleasure, and with a sudden and surprising dash of cruelty that 
Channis felt advance and suddenly withdraw: "But apparently the Second Foundation was 
warned. Else how and why did one Bail Channis arrive on Kalgan to handle my men and to 
assume the rather thankless task of outwitting me. The warning came too late, that is all." 

"Then," and Channis allowed pity to drench outward from him, "you don't even know what the 
Second Foundation is, or anything of the deeper meaning of all that has been going on." 

To gain time! 

The Mule felt the other's pity, and his eyes narrowed with instant hostility. He rubbed his nose 
in his familiar four-fingered gesture, and snapped: "Amuse yourself, then. What o/The Second 
Foundation?" 

Channis spoke deliberately, in words rather than in emotional symbology. He said: "From what I 
have heard, it was the mystery that surrounded the Second Foundation that most puzzled Mis. 
Hari Seldon founded his two units so differently. The First Foundation was a splurge that in two 
centuries dazzled half the Galaxy. And the Second was an abyss that was dark. 

"You won't understand why that was, unless you can once again feel the intellectual 
atmosphere of the days of the dying Empire. It was a time of absolutes, of the great final 
generalities, at least in thought. It was a sign of decaying culture, of course, that dams had 
been built against the further development of ideas. It was his revolt against these dams that 
made Seldon famous. It was that one last spark of youthful creation in him that lit the Empire in 
a sunset glow and dimly foreshadowed the rising sun of the Second Empire." 

"Very dramatic. So what?" 

"So he created his Foundations according to the laws of psychohistory, but who knew better 
than he that even those laws were relative. He never created a finished product. Finished 
products are for decadent minds. His was an evolving mechanism and the Second Foundation 
was the instrument of that evolution. We, First Citizen of your Temporary Union of Worlds, we 
are the guardians of Seldon's Plan. Only we!" 

"Are you trying to talk yourself into courage," inquired the Mule, contemptuously, "or are you 



trying to impress me? For the Second Foundation, Seldon's Plan, the Second Empire all 
impresses me not the least, nor touches any spring of compassion, sympathy, responsibility, 
nor any other source of emotional aid you may be trying to tap in me. And in any case, poor 
fool, speak of the Second Foundation in the past tense, for it is destroyed." 

Channis felt the emotional potential that pressed upon his mind rise in intensity as the Mule 
rose from his chair and approached. Fie fought back furiously, but something crept relentlessly 
on within him, battering and bending his mind back - and back. 

Fie felt the wall behind him, and the Mule faced him, skinny arms akimbo, lips smiling terribly 
beneath that mountain of nose. 

The Mule said: "Your game is through, Channis. The game of all of you-of all the men of what 
used to be the Second Foundation. Used to be! Used to be! 

"What were you sitting here waiting for all this time, with your babble to Pritcher, when you 
might have struck him down and taken the blaster from him without the least effort of physical 
force? You were waiting for me, weren't you, waiting to greet me in a situation that would not 
too arouse my suspicions. 

"Too bad for you that I needed no arousal. I knew you. I knew you well, Channis of the Second 
Foundation. 

"But what are you waiting for now? You still throw words at me desperately, as though the mere 
sound of your voice would freeze me to my seat. And all the while you speak, something in 
your mind is waiting and waiting and is still waiting. But no one is coming. None of those you 
expect - none of your allies. You are alone here, Channis, and you will remain alone. Do you 
know why? 

"It is because your Second Foundation miscalculated me to the very dregs of the end. I knew 
their plan early. They thought I would follow you here and be proper meat for their cooking. You 
were to be a decoy indeed - a decoy for a poor, foolish weakling mutant, so hot on the trail of 
Empire that he would fall blindly into an obvious pit. But am I their prisoner? 

"I wonder if it occurred to them that I’d scarcely be here without my fleet - against the artillery of 
any unit of which they are entirely and pitifully helpless? Did it occur to them that I would not 
pause for discussion or wait for events? 

"My ships were launched against Tazenda twelve hours ago and they are quite, quite through 
with their mission. Tazenda is laid in ruins; its centers of population are wiped out. There was 
no resistance. The Second Foundation no longer exists, Channis - and I, the queer, ugly 
weakling, am the ruler of the Galaxy." 

Channis could do nothing but shake his head feebly. "No- No-" 

"Yes- Yes-" mimicked the Mule. "And if you are the last one alive, and you may be, that will not 
be for long either." 

And then there followed a short, pregnant pause, and Channis almost howled with the sudden 
pain of that tearing penetration of the innermost tissues of his mind. 



The Mule drew back and muttered: "Not enough. You do not pass the test after all. Your 
despair is pretense. Your fear is not the broad overwhelming that adheres to the destruction of 
an ideal, but the puny seeping fear of personal destruction." 

And the Mule’s weak hand seized Channis by the throat in a puny grip that Channis was 
somehow unable to break. 

"You are my insurance, Channis. You are my director and safeguard against any 
underestimation I may make." The Mule's eyes bore down upon him. Insistent- Demanding- 

"Have I calculated rightly, Channis? Have I outwitted your men of the Second Foundation? 
Tazenda is destroyed, Channis, tremendously destroyed; so why is your despair pretense? 
Where is the reality? I must have reality and truth! Talk, Channis talk. Have I penetrated then, 
not deeply enough? Does the danger still exist? Talk, Channis. Where have I done wrong?" 

Channis felt the words drag out of his mouth. They did not come willingly. He clenched his teeth 
against them. He bit his tongue. He tensed every muscle of his throat. 

And they came out - gasping - pulled out by force and tearing his throat and tongue and teeth 
on the way. 

"Truth," he squeaked, "truth-" 

"Yes, truth. What is left to be done?" 

"Seldon founded Second Foundation here. Here, as I said. I told no lie. The psychologists 
arrived and took control of the native population." 

"Of Tazenda?" The Mule plunged deeply into the flooding torture of the other's emotional 
upwellings - tearing at them brutally. "It is Tazenda I have destroyed. You know what I want. 
Give it to me." 

"Not Tazenda. I said Second Foundationers might not be those apparently in power; Tazenda 
is the figurehead-" The words were almost unrecognizable, forming themselves against every 
atom of will of the Second Foundationer, "Rossem- Rossem- Rossem is the world-" 

The Mule loosed his grip and Channis dropped into a huddle of pain and torture. 

"And you thought to fool me?" said the Mule, softly. 

"You were fooled." It was the last dying shred of resistance in Channis. 

"But not long enough for you and yours. I am in communication with my Fleet. And after 
Tazenda can come Rossem. But first-" 

Channis felt the excruciating darkness rise against him, and the automatic lift of his arm to his 
tortured eyes could not ward it off. It was a darkness that throttled, and as he felt his tom, 
wounded mind reeling backwards, backwards into the everlasting black - there was that final 
picture of the triumphant Mule - laughing matchstick - that long, fleshy nose quivering with 
laughter. 



The sound faded away. The darkness embraced him lovingly. 

It ended with a cracking sensation that was like the jagged glare of a lightning flash, and 
Channis came slowly to earth while sight returned painfully in blurry transmission through 
tear-drenched eyes. 

His head ached unbearably, and it was only with a stab of agony that he could bring up a hand 
to it. 

Obviously, he was alive. Softly, like feathers caught up in an eddy of air that had passed, his 
thoughts steadied and drifted to rest. He felt comfort suck in - from outside. Slowly, torturedly, 
he bent his neck - and relief was a sharp pang. 

For the door was open; and the First Speaker stood just inside the threshold. He tried to speak, 
to shout, to warn - but his tongue froze and he knew that a part of the Mule's mighty mind still 
held him and clamped all speech within him. 

He bent his neck once more. The Mule was still in the room. He was angry and hot-eyed. He 
laughed no longer, but his teeth were bared in a ferocious smile. 

Channis felt the First Speaker's mental influence moving gently over his mind with a healing 
touch and then there was the numbing sensation as it came into contact with the Mule's 
defense for an instant of struggle and withdrew. 

The Mule said gratingly, with a fury that was grotesque in his meagre body: "Then another 
comes to greet me." His agile mind reached its tendrils out of the room- out- out- 

"You are alone," he said. 

And the First Speaker interrupted with an acquiescence: "I am thoroughly alone. It is necessary 
that I be alone, since it was I who miscalculated your future five years ago. There would be a 
certain satisfaction to me in correcting that matter without aid. Unfortunately, I did not count on 
the strength of your Field of Emotional Repulsion that surrounded this place. It took me long to 
penetrate. I congratulate you upon the skill with which it was constructed." 

"Thank you for nothing," came the hostile rejoinder. "Bandy no compliments with me. Have you 
come to add your brain splinter to that of yonder cracked pillar of your realm?" 

The First Speaker smiled: "Why, the man you call Bail Channis performed his mission well, the 
more so since he was not your mental equal by far. I can see, of course, that you have 
mistreated him, yet it may be that we may restore him fully even yet. He is a brave man, sir. He 
volunteered for this mission although we were able to predict mathematically the huge chance 
of damage to his mind - a more fearful alternative than that of mere physical crippling." 

Channis' mind pulsed futilely with what he wanted to say and couldn't; the warning he wished to 
shout and was unable to. He could only emit that continuous stream of fear- fear- 

The Mule was calm. "You know, of course, of the destruction of Tazenda." 

"I do. The assault by your fleet was foreseen." 



Grimly: "Yes, so I suppose. But not prevented, eh?" 

"No, not prevented." The First Speaker's emotional symbology was plain. It was almost a 
self-horror; a complete self-disgust: "And the fault is much more mine than yours. Who could 
have imagined your powers five years ago. We suspected from the start - from the moment 
you captured Kalgan - that you had the powers of emotional control. That was not too 
surprising, First Citizen, as I can explain to you. 

"Emotional contact such as you and I possess is not a very new development. Actually it is 
implicit in the human brain. Most humans can read emotion in a primitive manner by 
associating it pragmatically with facial expression, tone of voice and so on. A good many 
animals possess the faculty to a higher degree; they use the sense of smell to a good extent 
and the emotions involved are, of course, less complex. 

"Actually, humans are capable of much more, but the faculty of direct emotional contact tended 
to atrophy with the development of speech a million years back. It has been the great advance 
of our Second Foundation that this forgotten sense has been restored to at least some of its 
potentialities. 

"But we are not born with its full use. A million years of decay is a formidable obstacle, and we 
must educate the sense, exercise it as we exercise our muscles. And there you have the main 
difference. You were born with it. 

"So much we could calculate. We could also calculate the effect of such a sense upon a person 
in a world of men who did not possess it. The seeing man in the kingdom of the blind- We 
calculated the extent to which a megalomania would take control of you and we thought we 
were prepared. But for two factors we were not prepared. 

"The first was the great extent of your sense. We can induce emotional contact only when in 
eyeshot, which is why we are more helpless against physical weapons than you might think. 
Sight plays such an enormous part. Not so with you. You are definitely known to have had men 
under control, and, further, to have had intimate emotional contact with them when out of sight 
and out of earshot. That was discovered too late. 

"Secondly, we did not know of your physical shortcomings, particularly the one that seemed so 
important to you, that you adopted the name of the Mule. We didn't foresee that you were not 
merely a mutant, but a sterile mutant and the added psychic distortion due to your inferiority 
complex passed us by. We allowed only for a megalomania - not for an intensely psychopathic 
paranoia as well. 

"It is myself that bears the responsibility for having missed all that, for I was the leader of the 
Second Foundation when you captured Kalgan. When you destroyed the First Foundation, we 
found out - but too late - and for that fault millions have died on Tazenda." 

"And you will correct things now?" The Mules thin lips curled, his mind pulsing with hate: "What 
will you do? Fatten me? Restore me to a masculine vigor? Take away from my past the long 
childhood in an alien environment. Do you regret my sufferings? Do you regret my 
unhappiness? I have no sorrow for what I did in my necessity. Let the Galaxy Protect itself as 
best it can, since it stirred not a whit for my protection when I needed it." 



Your emotions are, of course," said the First Speaker, "only the children of your background 
and are not to be condemned - merely changed. The destruction of Tazenda was unavoidable. 
The alternative would have been a much greater destruction generally throughout the Galaxy 
over a period of centuries. We did our best in our limited way. We withdrew as many men from 
Tazenda as we could. We decentralized the rest of the world. Unfortunately, our measures 
were of necessity far from adequate. It left many millions to die - do you not regret that?" 

"Not at all - any more than I regret the hundred thousand that must die on Rossem in not more 
than six hours." 

"On Rossem?" said the First Speaker, quickly. 

Fie turned to Channis who had forced himself into a half-sitting posture, and his mind exerted 
its force. Channis, felt the duel of minds strain over him, and then there was a short snapping of 
the bond and the words came tumbling out of his mouth: "Sir, I have failed completely. He 
forced it from me not ten minutes before your arrival. I could not resist him and I offer no 
excuses. He knows Tazenda is not the Second Foundation. He knows that Rossem is." 

And the bonds closed down upon him again. 

The First Speaker frowned: "I see. What is it you are planning to do?" 

"Do you really wonder? Do you really find it difficult to penetrate the obvious? All this time that 
you have preached to me of the nature of emotional contact - all this time that you have been 
throwing words such as megalomania and paranoia at me, I have been working. I have been in 
contact with my Fleet and it has its orders. In six hours, unless I should for some reason 
counteract my orders, they are to bombard all of Rossem except this lone village and an area 
of a hundred square miles about it. They are to do a thorough job and are then to land here. 

"You have six hours, and in six hours, you cannot beat down my mind, nor can you save the 
rest of Rossem." 

The Mule spread his hands and laughed again while the First Speaker seemed to find difficulty 
in absorbing this new state of affairs. 

He said: "The alternative?" 

"Why should there even be an alternative? I can stand to gain no more by any alternative. Is it 
the lives of those on Rossem I'm to be chary of? Perhaps if you allow my ships to land and 
submit, all of you - all the men on the Second Foundation - to mental control sufficient to suit 
myself, I may countermand the bombardment orders. It may be worthwhile to put so many men 
of high intelligence under my control. But then again it would be a considerable effort and 
perhaps not worth it after all, so I'm not particularly eager to have you agree to it. What do you 
say, Second Foundationer? What weapon have you against my mind which is as strong as 
yours at least and against my ships which are stronger than anything you have ever dreamed 
of possessing?" 

"What have I?" repeated the First Speaker, slowly: "Why nothing - except a little grain - such a 
little grain of knowledge that even yet you do not possess." 



"Speak quickly," laughed the Mule, "speak inventively. For squirm as you might, you won't 
squirm out of this." 

"Poor mutant," said the First Speaker, "I have nothing to squirm out of. Ask yourself - why was 
Bail Channis sent to Kalgan as a decoy - Bail Channis, who though young and brave is almost 
as much your mental inferior as is this sleeping officer of yours, this Han Pritcher. Why did not I 
go, or another of our leaders, who would be more your match?" 

"Perhaps," came the supremely confident reply, "you were not sufficiently foolish, since 
perhaps none of you are my match." 

"The true reason is more logical. You knew Channis to be a Second Foundationer. He lacked 
the capacity to hide that from you. And you knew, too, that you were his superior, so you were 
not afraid to play his game and follow him as he wished you to in order to outwit him later. Had I 
gone to Kalgan, you would have killed me for I would have been a real danger, or had I avoided 
death by concealing my identity, I would yet have failed in persuading you to follow me into 
space. It was only known inferiority that lured you on. And had you remained on Kalgan, not all 
the force of the Second Foundation could have harmed you, surrounded as you were by your 
men, your machines, and your mental power." 

"My mental power is yet with me, squirmer," said the Mule, "and my men and machines are not 
far off." 

"Truly so, but you are not on Kalgan. You are here in the Kingdom of Tazenda, logically 
presented to you as the Second Foundation - very logically presented. It had to be so 
presented, for you are a wise man, First Citizen, and would follow only logic." 

"Correct, and it was a momentary victory for your side, but there was still time for me to worm 
the truth from your man, Channis, and still wisdom in me to realize that such a truth might 
exist." 

"And on our side, oh, not-quite-sufficiently-subtle one, was the realization that you might go that 
one step further and so Bail Channis was prepared for you." 

"That he most certainly was not, for I stripped his brain clean as any plucked chicken. It 
quivered bare and open before me and when he said Rossem was the Second Foundation, it 
was basic truth for I had ground him so flat and smooth that not the smidgeon of a deceit could 
have found refuge in any microscopic crevice." 

"True enough. So much the better for our foresight. For I have told you already that Bail 
Channis was a volunteer. Do you know what sort of a volunteer? Before he left our Foundation 
for Kalgan and you, he submitted to emotional surgery of a drastic nature. Do you think it was 
sufficient to deceive you? Do you think Bail Channis, mentally untouched, could possibly 
deceive you? No, Bail Channis was himself deceived, of necessity and voluntarily. Down to the 
inmost core of his mind, Bail Channis honestly believes that Rossem is the Second Foundation. 

"And for three years now, we of the Second Foundation have built up the appearance of that 
here in the Kingdom of Tazenda, in preparation and waiting for you. And we have succeeded, 
have we not? You penetrated to Tazenda, and beyond that, to Rossem - but past that, you 



could not go." 

The Mule was upon his feet: "You dare tell me that Rossem also, is not the Second 
Foundation?" 

Channis, from the floor, felt his bonds burst for good, under a stream of mental force on the part 
of the First Speaker and strained upright. Fie let out one long, incredulous cry: "You mean 
Rossem is not the Second Foundation?" 

The memories of life, the knowledge of his mind - everything - whirled mistily about him in 
confusion. 

The First Speaker smiled: "You see, First Citizen, Channis is as upset as you are. Of course, 
Rossem is not the Second Foundation. Are we madmen then, to lead you, our greatest, most 
powerful, most dangerous enemy to our own world? Oh, no! 

"Let your Fleet bombard Rossem, First Citizen, if you must have it so. Let them destroy all they 
can. For at most they can kill only Channis and myself - and that will leave you in a situation 
improved not in the least. 

"For the Second Foundation's Expedition to Rossem which has been here for three years and 
has functioned, temporarily, as Elders in this village, embarked yesterday and are returning to 
Kalgan. They will evade your Fleet, of course, and they will arrive in Kalgan at least a day 
before you can, which is why I tell you all this. Unless I countermand my orders, when you 
return, you will find a revolting Empire, a disintegrated realm, and only the men with you in your 
Fleet here will be loyal to you. They will be hopelessly outnumbered. And moreover, the men of 
the Second Foundation will be with your Flome Fleet and will see to it that you reconvert no 
one. Your Empire is done, mutant." 

Slowly, the Mule bowed his head, as anger and despair cornered his mind completely, "Yes. 
Too late- Too late- Now I see it." 

"Now you see it," agreed the First Speaker, "and now you don't." 

In the despair of that moment, when the Mule's mind lay open, the First Speaker - ready for 
that moment and pre-sure of its nature - entered quickly. It required a rather insignificant 
fraction of a second to consummate the change completely. 

The Mule looked up and said: "Then I shall return to Kalgan? 

"Certainly. Flow do you feel?" 

"Excellently well." Flis brow puckered: "Who are you?" 

"Does it matter?" 

"Of course not." Fie dismissed the matter, and touched Pritcher's shoulder: "Wake up, Pritcher, 
we're going home." 

It was two hours later that Bail Channis felt strong enough to walk by himself. Fie said: "Fie 
won't ever remember?" 



"Never. He retains his mental powers and his Empire - but his motivations are now entirely 
different. The notion of a Second Foundation is a blank to him, and he is a man of peace. He 
will be a far happier man henceforward, too, for the few years of life left him by his maladjusted 
physique. And then, after he is dead Seldon's Plan will go on - somehow." 

"And it is true," urged Channis, "it is true that Rossem is not the Second Foundation? I could 
swear - I tell you I know it is. I am not mad." 

"You are not mad, Channis, merely, as I have said, changed. Rossem is not the Second 
Foundation. Come! We, too, will return home." 

LAST INTERLUDE 

Bail Channis sat in the small white-tiled room and allowed his mind to relax. He was content to 
live in the present. There were the walls and the window and the grass outside. They had no 
names. They were just things. There was a bed and a chair an books that developed 
themselves idly on the screen at the foot of his bed. There was the nurse who brought him his 
food. 

At first he had made efforts to piece together the scraps of things he had heard. Such as those 
two men talking together. 

One had said: "Complete aphasia now. It’s cleaned out, and I think without damage. It will only 
be necessary to return the recording of his original brain-wave makeup." 

He remembered the sounds by rote, and for some reason they seemed peculiar sounds - as if 
they meant something. But why bother. 

Better to watch the pretty changing colors on the screen at the foot of the thing he lay on. 

And then someone entered and did things to him and for a long time, he slept. 

And when that had passed, the bed was suddenly a bed and he knew he was in a hospital, and 
the words he remembered made sense. 

He sat up: "What's happening?" 

The First Speaker was beside him, "You're on the Second Foundation, and you have your mind 
back - your original mind." 

"Yes! Yes !" Channis came to the realization that he was himself, and there was incredible 
triumph and joy in that. 

"And now tell me," said the First Speaker, "do you know where the Second Foundation is now?" 

And the truth came flooding down in one enormous wave and Channis did not answer. Like 
Ebling Mis before him, he was conscious of only one vast, numbing surprise. 

Until he finally nodded, and said: "By the Stars of the Galaxy - now, I know." 



PART II 

SEARCH BY THE FOUNDATION 


7 

Arcadia 

DARELL, ARKADY novelist, born 1 1, 5, 362 F.E., died 1, 7, 443 F.E. Although primarily a writer 
of fiction, Arkady Darell is best known for her biography of her grandmother, Bayta Darell. 

Based on first-hand information, it has for centuries served as a primary source of information 
concerning the Mule and his times. ... Like "Unkeyed Memories", her novel "Time and Time and 
Over" is a stirring reflection of the brilliant Kalganian society of the early Interregnum, based, it 
is said, on a visit to Kalgan in her youth.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Arcadia Darell declaimed firmly into the mouthpiece of her transcriber: 

"The Future of Seldon's Plan, by A. Darell" and then thought darkly that some day when she 
was a great writer, she would write all her masterpieces under the pseudonym of Arkady. Just 
Arkady. No last name at all. 

"A. Darell" would be just the sort of thing that she would have to put on all her themes for her 
class in Composition and Rhetoric - so tasteless. All the other kids had to do it, too, except for 
Olynthus Dam, because the class laughed so when he did it the first time, And "Arcadia" was a 
little girls name, wished on her because her great-grandmother had been called that; her 
parents just had no imagination at all. 

Now that she was two days past fourteen, you'd think they'd recognize the simple fact of 
adulthood and call her Arkady. Her lips tightened as she thought of her father looking up from 
his book-viewer just long enough to say, "But if you're going to pretend you're nineteen, 

Arcadia, what will you do when you're twenty-five and all the boys think you're thirty?" 

From where she sprawled across the arms and into the hollow of her own special armchair, she 
could see the mirror on her dresser. Her foot was a little in the way because her house slipper 
kept twirling about her big toe, so she pulled it in and sat up with an unnatural straightness to 
her neck that she felt sure, somehow, lengthened it a full two inches into slim regality. 

For a moment, she considered her face thoughtfully - too fat. She opened her jaws half an inch 
behind closed lips, and caught the resultant trace of unnatural gauntness at every angle. She 
licked her lips with a quick touch of tongue and let them pout a bit in moist softness. Then she 
let her eyelids droop in a weary, worldly way- Oh, golly if only her cheeks weren't that silly pink. 




She tried putting her fingers to the outer comers of her eye and tilting the lids a bit to get that 
mysterious exotic languor of the women of the inner star systems, but her hands were in the 
way and she couldn't see her face very well. 

Then she lifted her chin, caught herself at a half-profile, and with her eyes a little strained from 
looking out the comer and her neck muscles faintly aching, she said, in a voice one octave 
below its natural pitch, "Really, father, if you think it makes a particle of difference to me what 
some silly old boys think you just-" 

And then she remembered that she still had the transmitter open in her hand and said, drearily, 
"Oh, golly," and shut it off. 

The faintly violet paper with the peach margin line on the left had upon it the following: 

"THE FUTURE OF SELDON'S PLAN 

"Really, father, if you think it makes a particle of difference to me what some silly old boys think 
you just 

"Oh, golly." 

She pulled the sheet out of the machine with annoyance and another clicked neatly into place. 

But her face smoothed out of its vexation, nevertheless, and her wide, little mouth stretched 
into a self-satisfied smile. She sniffed at the paper delicately, just right. Just that proper touch of 
elegance and charm. And the penmanship was just the last word. 

The machine had been delivered two days ago on her first adult birthday. She had said, "But 
father, everybody - just everybody in the class who has the slightest pretensions to being 
anybody has one. Nobody but some old drips would use hand machines-" 

The salesman had said, "There is no other model as compact on the one hand and as 
adaptable on the other. It will spell and punctuate correctly according to the sense of the 
sentence. Naturally, it is a great aid to education since it encourages the user to employ careful 
enunciation and breathing in order to make sure of the correct spelling, to say nothing of 
demanding a proper and elegant delivery for correct punctuation." 

Even then her father had tried to get one geared for type-print as if she were some dried-up, 
old-maid teacher. 

But when it was delivered, it was the model she wanted - obtained perhaps with a little more 
wail and sniffle than quite went with the adulthood of fourteen - and copy was turned out in a 
charming and entirely feminine handwriting, with the most beautifully graceful capitals anyone 
ever saw. 

Even the phrase, "Oh, golly." somehow breathed glamour when the Transcriber was done with 
it. 

But just the same she had to get it right, so she sat up straight in her chair, placed her first draft 
before her in businesslike fashion, and began again, crisply and clearly; her abdomen flat, her 
chest lifted, and her breathing carefully controlled. She intoned, with dramatic fervor: 



The Future of Seldon's Plan. 


"The Foundation's past history is, I am sure, well-known to all of us who have had the good 
fortune to be educated in our planet's efficient and well-staffed school system. 

(There! That would start things off right with Miss Erlking, that mean old hag.) 

That past history is largely the past history of the great Plan of Hari Seldon. The two are one. 
But the question in the mind of most people today is whether this Plan will continue in all its 
great wisdom, or whether it will be foully destroyed, or, perhaps, has been so destroyed 
already. 

"To understand this, it may be best to pass quickly over some of the highlights of the Plan as it 
has been revealed to humanity thus far. 

(This part was easy because she had taken Modern History the semester before.) 

"In the days, nearly four centuries ago, when the First Galactic Empire was decaying into the 
paralysis that preceded final death, one man - the great Hari Seldon - foresaw the 
approaching end. Through the science of psychohistory, the intrissacies of whose mathematics 
has long since been forgotten, 

(She paused in a trifle of doubt. She was sure that "intricacies" was pronounced with soft c's 
but the spelling didn't look right. Oh, well, the machine couldn't very well be wrong-) 

he and the men who worked with him are able to foretell the course of the great social and 
economic currents sweeping the Galaxy at the time. It was possible for them to realize that, left 
to itself, the Empire would break up, and that thereafter there would be at least thirty thousand 
years of anarchic chaos prior to the establishment of a new Empire. 

"It was too late to prevent the great Fall, but it was still possible, at least, to cut short the 
intermediate period of chaos. The Plan was, therefore, evolved whereby only a single 
millennium would separate the Second Empire from the First. We are completing the fourth 
century of that millennium, and many generations of men have lived and died while the Plan 
has continued its inexorable workings. 

"Hari Seldon established two Foundations at the opposite ends of the Galaxy, in a manner and 
under such circumstances as would yield the best mathematical solution for his 
psychohistorical problem. In one of these, our Foundation, established here on Terminus, there 
was concentrated the physical science of the Empire, and through the possession of that 
science, the Foundation was able to withstand the attacks of the barbarous kingdoms which 
had broken away and become independent, out at the hinge of the Empire. 

"The Foundation, indeed, was able to conquer in its turn these short-lived kingdoms by means 
of the leadership of a series of wise and heroic men like Salvor Hardin and Hober Mallow who 
were able to interpret the Plan intelligently and to guide our land through its 

(She had written "intricacies" here also, but decided not to risk it a second time.) 

complications. All our planets still revere their memories although centuries have passed. 



"Eventually, the Foundation established a commercial system which controlled a large portion 
of the Siwennian and Anacreonian sectors of the Galaxy, and even defeated the remnants of 
the old Empire under its last great general, Bel Riose. It seemed that nothing could now stop 
the workings of Seldon's plan. Every crisis that Seldon had planned had come at its appropriate 
time and had been solved, and with each solution the Foundation had taken another giant 
stride toward Second Empire and peace. 

"And then, 

(Her breath came short at this point, and she hissed the word, between her teeth, but the 
Transmitter simply wrote them calmly and gracefully.) 

with the last remnants of the dead First Empire gone and with only ineffectual warlords ruling 
over the splinters and remnants of the decayed colossus, 

(She got that phrase out of a thriller on the video last week, but old Miss Erlking never listened 
to anything but symphonies and lectures, so she'd never know.) 

there came the Mule. 

"This strange man was not allowed for in the Plan. Fie was a mutant, whose birth could not 
have been predicted. Fie had strange and mysterious power of controlling and manipulating 
human emotions and in this manner could bend all men to his will. With breath-taking swiftness, 
he became a conqueror and Empire-builder, until, finally, he even defeated the Foundation 
itself. 

"Yet he never obtained universal dominion, since in his first overpowering lunge he was 
stopped by the wisdom and daring of a great woman 

(Now there was that old problem again. Father would insist that she never bring up the fact that 
she was the grandchild of Bayta Darell. Everyone knew it and Bayta was just about the greatest 
woman there ever was and she had stopped the Mule singlehanded.) 

in a manner the true story of which is known in its entirety to very few. 

(There! If she had to read it to the class, that last could he said in a dark voice, and someone 
would be sure to ask what the true story was, and then - well, and then she couldn't help tell 
the truth if they asked her, could she? In her mind, she was already wordlessly whizzing 
through a hurt and eloquent explanation to a stern and questioning paternal parent.) 

"After five years of restricted rule, another change took place, the reasons for which are not 
known, and the Mule abandoned all plans for further conquest. His last five years were those of 
an enlightened despot. 

"It is said by some that the change in the Mule was brought about by the intervention of the 
Second Foundation. Flowever, no man has ever discovered the exact location of this other 
Foundation, nor knows its exact function, so that theory remains unproven. 

"A whole generation has passed since the death of the Mule. What of the future, then, now that 
he has come and gone? Fie interrupted Seldon's Plan and seemed to have burst it to 



fragments, yet as soon as he died, the Foundation rose again, like a nova from the dead ashes 
of a dying star. 

(She had made that up herself.) 

Once again, the planet Terminus houses the center of a commercial federation almost as great 
and as rich as before the conquest, and even more peaceful and democratic. 

"Is this planned? Is Seldon's great dream still alive, and will a Second Galactic Empire yet be 
formed six hundred years from now? I, myself, believe so, because 

(This was the important part. Miss Erlking always had those large, ugly red-pencil scrawls that 
went: 'But this is only descriptive. What are your personal reactions? Think! Express yourself! 
Penetrate your own soul!' Penetrate your own soul. A lot she knew about souls, with her lemon 
face that never smiled in its life-) 

never at any time has the political situation been so favorable. The old Empire is completely 
dead and the period of the Mule's rule put an end to the era of warlords that preceded him. 
Most of the surrounding portions of the Galaxy are civilized and peaceful. 

"Moreover the internal health of the Foundation is better than ever before. The despotic times 
of the pre-Conquest hereditary mayors have given way to the democratic elections of early 
times. There are no longer dissident worlds of independent Traders; no longer the injustices 
and dislocations that accompanied accumulations of great wealth in the hands of a few. 

"There is no reason, therefore, to fear failure, unless it is true that the Second Foundation itself 
presents a danger. Those who think so have no evidence to back their claim, but merely vague 
fears and superstitions. I think that our confidence in ourselves, in our nation, and in Hari 
Seldon's great Plan should drive from our hearts and minds all uncertainties and 

(Hm-m-m. This was awfully corny, but something like this was expected at the end.) 

so I say-" 

That is as far as "The Future of Seldon's Plan" got, at that moment, because there was the 
gentlest little tap on the window, and when Arcadia shot up to a balance on one arm of the 
chair, she found herself confronted by a smiling face beyond the glass, its even symmetry of 
feature interestingly accentuated by the short, vertical fine of a finger before its lips. 

With the slight pause necessary to assume an attitude of bepuzzlement, Arcadia dismounted 
from the armchair, walked to the couch that fronted the wide window that held the apparition 
and, kneeling upon it, stared out thoughtfully. 

The smile upon the man's face faded quickly. While the fingers of one hand tightened whitely 
upon the sill, the other made a quick gesture. Arcadia obeyed calmly, and closed the latch that 
moved the lower third of the window smoothly into its socket in the wall, allowing the warm 
spring air to interfere with the conditioning within. 

"You can't get in," she said, with comfortable smugness. "The windows are all screened, and 
keyed only to people who belong here. If you come in, all sorts of alarms will break loose." A 



pause, then she added, "You look sort of silly balancing on that ledge underneath the window. 

If you're not careful, you'll fall and break your neck and a lot of valuable flowers." 

"In that case," said the man at the window, who had been thinking that very thing - with a 
slightly different arrangement of adjectives- "will you shut off the screen and let me in?" 

"No use in doing that'" said Arcadia. "You're probably thinking of a different house, because I'm 
not the kind of girl who lets strange men into their ... her bedroom this time of night." Her eyes, 
as she said it, took on a heavy-lidded sultriness - or an unreasonable facsimile thereof. 

All traces of humor whatever had disappeared from the young stranger's face. He muttered, 
"This is Dr. Darell's house, isn't it?" 

"Why should I tell you?" 

"Oh, Galaxy- Good-by-" 

"If you jump off, young man, I will personally give the alarm." (This was intended as a refined 
and sophisticated thrust of irony, since to Arcadia's enlightened eyes, the intruder was an 
obviously mature thirty, at least - quite elderly, in fact.) 

Quite a pause. Then, tightly, he said, "Well, now, look here, girlie, if you don't want me to stay, 
and don't want me to go, what do you want me to do?" 

"You can come in, I suppose. Dr. Darell does live here. I’ll shut off the screen now." 

Warily, after a searching look, the young man poked his hand through the window, then 
hunched himself up and through it. He brushed at his knees with an angry, slapping gesture, 
and lifted a reddened face at her. 

"You're quite sure that your character and reputation won't suffer when they find me here, are 
you?" 

"Not as much as yours would, because just as soon as I hear footsteps outside, I'll just shout 
and yell and say you forced your way in here." 

"Yes?" he replied with heavy courtesy, "And how do you intend to explain the shut-off protective 
screen?" 

"Poof! That would be easy. There wasn't any there in the first place." 

The man's eyes were wide with chagrin. "That was a bluff? How old are you, kid?" 

"I consider that a very impertinent question, young man. And I am not accustomed to being 
addressed as 'kid.'" 

"I don't wonder. You're probably the Mule's grandmother in disguise. Do you mind if I leave now 
before you arrange a lynching party with myself as star performer?" 

"You had better not leave - because my father's expecting you." 

The man's look became a wary one, again. An eyebrow shot up as he said, lightly, "Oh? 



Anyone with your father?' 

"No." 

"Anyone called on him lately?' 

"Only tradespeople - and you." 

"Anything unusual happen at all?" 

"Only you." 

"Forget me, will you? No, don't forget me. Tell me, how did you know your father was expecting 
me?" 

"Oh, that was easy. Last week, he received a Personal Capsule, keyed to him personally, with 
a self-oxidizing message, you know. He threw the capsule shell into the Trash Disinto, and 
yesterday, he gave Poli - that's our maid, you see - a month's vacation so she could visit her 
sister in Terminus City, and this afternoon, he made up the bed in the spare room. So I knew 
he expected somebody that I wasn't supposed to know anything about. Usually, he tells me 
everything." 

"Really! I'm surprised he has to. I should think you'd know everything before he tells you." 

'I usually do." Then she laughed. She was beginning to feel very much at ease. The visitor was 
elderly, but very distinguished-looking with curly brown hair and very blue eyes. Maybe she 
could meet somebody like that again, sometimes, when she was old herself. 

"And just how," he asked, "did you know it was I he expected." 

"Well, who else could \\ be? He was expecting somebody in so secrety a way, if you know what 
I mean - and then you come gumping around trying to sneak through windows, instead of 
walking through the front door, the way you would if you had any sense." She remembered a 
favorite line, and used it promptly. "Men are so stupid!" 

"Pretty stuck on yourself, aren't you, kid? I mean, Miss. You could be wrong, you know. What if 
I told you that all this is a mystery to me and that as far as I know, your father is expecting 
someone else, not me." 

"Oh, I don't think so. I didn't ask you to come in, until after I saw you drop your briefcase." 

"My what?" 

"Your briefcase, young man. I'm not blind. You didn't drop it by accident, because you looked 
down first, so as to make sure it would land right. Then you must have realized it would land 
just under the hedges and wouldn't be seen, so you dropped it and didn't look down afterwards. 
Now since you came to the window instead of the front door, it must mean that you were a little 
afraid to trust yourself in the house before investigating the place. And after you had a little 
trouble with me, you took care of your briefcase before taking care of yourself, which means 
that you consider whatever your briefcase has in it to be more valuable than your own safety, 
and that means that as long as you're in here and the briefcase is out there and we know that 



it's out there, you're probably pretty helpless." 

She paused for a much-needed breath, and the man said, grittily, "Except that I think I'll choke 
you just about medium dead and get out of here, with the briefcase." 

"Except, young man, that I happen to have a baseball bat under my bed, which I can reach in 
two seconds from where I'm sitting, and I'm very strong for a girl." 

Impasse. Finally, with a strained courtesy, the "young man" said, "Shall I introduce myself, 
since we're being so chummy. I'm Pelleas Anthor. And your name?" 

"I'm Area- Arkady Darell. Pleased to meet you." 

"And now Arkady, would you be a good little girl and call your father?" 

Arcadia bridled. "I'm not a little girl. I think you're very rude - especially when you're asking a 
favor." 

Pelleas Anthor sighed. "Very well. Would you be a good, kind, dear, little old lady, just chock full 
of lavender, and call your father?" 

"That's not what I meant either, but I’ll call him. Only not so I'll take my eyes off you , young 
man." And she stamped on the floor. 

There came the sound of hurrying footsteps in the hall, and the door was flung open. 

"Arcadia-" There was a tiny explosion of exhaled air, and Dr. Darell said, "Who are you, sir?" 

Pelleas sprang to his feet in what was quite obviously relief. "Dr. Toran Darell? I am Pelleas 
Anthor. You've received word about me, I think. At least, your daughter says you have." 

"My daughter says I have?" He bent a frowning glance at her which caromed harmlessly off the 
wide-eyed and impenetrable web of innocence with which she met the accusation. 

Dr. Darell said, finally: "I have been expecting you. Would you mind coming down with me, 
please?" And he stopped as his eye caught a flicker of motion, which Arcadia caught 
simultaneously. 

She scrambled toward her Transcriber, but it was quite useless, since her father was standing 
right next to it. He said, sweetly, "You've left it going all this time, Arcadia." 

"Father," she squeaked, in real anguish, "it is very ungentlemanly to read another person's 
private correspondence, especially when it's talking correspondence." 

"Ah," said her father, "but 'talking correspondence' with a strange man in your bedroom! As a 
father, Arcadia, I must protect you against evil." 

"Oh, golly - it was nothing like that." 

Pelleas laughed suddenly, "Oh, but it was, Dr. Darell. The young lady was going to accuse me 
of all sorts of things, and I must insist that you read it, if only to clear my name." 


Oh-" Arcadia held back her tears with an effort. Her own father didn't even trust her. And that 



darned Transcriber- If that silly fool hadn't come gooping at the window, and making her forget 
to turn it off. And now her father would be making long, gentle speeches about what young 
ladies aren't supposed to do. There just wasn't anything they were supposed to do, it looked 
like, except choke and die, maybe. 

"Arcadia," said her father, gently, "it strikes me that a young lady-" 

She knew it. She knew it. 

"-should not be quite so impertinent to men older than she is. 

"Well, what did he want to come peeping around my window for? A young lady has a right to 
privacy- Now I'll have to do my whole darned composition over." 

"It's not up to you to question his propriety in coming to your window. You should simply not 
have let him in. You should have called me instantly - especially if you thought I was expecting 
him." 

She said, peevishly, "It's just as well if you didn't see him - stupid thing. Hell give the whole 
thing away if he keeps on going to windows, instead of doors." 

"Arcadia, nobody wants your opinion on matters you know nothing of." 

"I do, too. It's the Second Foundation, that's what it is." 

There was a silence. Even Arcadia felt a little nervous stirring in her abdomen. 

Dr. Darell said, softly, "Where have you heard this?" 

"Nowheres, but what else is there to be so secret about? And you don't have to worry that I’ll 
tell anyone." 

"Mr. Anthor," said Dr. Darell, "I must apologize for all this." 

"Oh, that's all right," came Anthor's rather hollow response. "It's not your fault if she's sold 
herself to the forces of darkness. But do you mind if I ask her a question before we go. Miss 
Arcadia-" 

"What do you want?" 

"Why do you think it is stupid to go to windows instead of to doors?" 

"Because you advertise what you're trying to hide, silly. If I have a secret, I don't put tape over 
my mouth and let everyone know I have a secret. I talk just as much as usual, only about 
something else. Didn't you ever read any of the sayings of Salvor Hardin? He was our first 
Mayor, you know." 

"Yes, I know." 

"Well, he used to say that only a he that wasn't ashamed of itself could possibly succeed. He 
also said that nothing had to be true, but everything had to sound true. Well, when you come in 
through a window, it's a lie that's ashamed of itself and it doesn't sound true." 



"Then what would you have done?" 

"If I had wanted to see my father on top secret business, I would have made his acquaintance 
openly and seen him about all sorts of strictly legitimate things. And then when everyone knew 
all about you and connected you with my father as a matter of course, you could be as top 
secret as you want and nobody would ever think of questioning it." 

Anthor looked at the girl strangely, then at Dr. Darell. He said, "Let's go. I have a briefcase I 
want to pick up in the garden. Wait! Just one last question. Arcadia, you don't really have a 
baseball bat under your bed, do you?" 

"No! I don't." 

"Hah. I didn't think so." 

Dr. Darell stopped at the door. "Arcadia," he said, "when you rewrite your composition on the 
Seldon Plan, don't be unnecessarily mysterious about your grandmother. There is no necessity 
to mention that part at all." 

He and Pelleas descended the stairs in silence. Then the visitor asked in a strained voice, "Do 
you mind, sir? How old is she?" 

"Fourteen, day before yesterday." 

"Fourteen? Great Galaxy- Tell me, has she ever said she expects to marry some day?" 

"No, she hasn't. Not to me." 

Well, if she ever does, shoot him. The one she's going to marry, I mean." He stared earnestly 
into the older man's eyes. "I'm serious. Life could hold no greater horror than living with what 
shell be like when she's twenty. I don't mean to offend you, of course." 

"You don't offend me. I think I know what you mean." 

Upstairs, the object of their tender analyses faced the Transcriber with revolted weariness and 
said, dully: "Thefutureofseldonsplan." The Transcriber with infinite aplomb, translated that into 
elegantly, complicated script capitals as: 

"The Future of Seldon's Plan." 


8 

Seldon's Plan 

MATHEMATICS The synthesis of the calculus of n-variables and of n-dimensional geometry is 
the basis of what Seldon once called "my little algebra of humanity".... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Consider a room! 



The location of the room is not in question at the moment. It is merely sufficient to say that in 
that room, more than anywhere, the Second Foundation existed. 

It was a room which, through the centuries, had been the abode of pure science - yet it had 
none of the gadgets with which, through millennia of association, science has come to be 
considered equivalent. It was a science, instead, which dealt with mathematical concepts only, 
in a manner similar to the speculation of ancient, ancient races in the primitive, prehistoric days 
before technology had come to be; before Man had spread beyond a single, now-unknown 
world. 

For one thing, there was in that room - protected by a mental science as yet unassailable by 
the combined physical might of the rest of the Galaxy - the Prime Radiant, which held in its 
vitals the Seldon Plan - complete. 

For another, there was a man, too, in that room - The First Speaker. 

Fie was the twelfth in the line of chief guardians of the Plan, and his title bore no deeper 
significance than the fact that at the gatherings of the leaders of the Second Foundation, he 
spoke first. 

His predecessor had beaten the Mule, but the wreckage of that gigantic struggle still littered the 
path of the Plan- For twenty-five years, he, and his administration, had been trying to force a 
Galaxy of stubborn and stupid human beings back to the path- It was a terrible task. 

The First Speaker looked up at the opening door. Even while, in the loneliness of the room, he 
considered his quarter century of effort, which now so slowly and inevitably approached its 
climax; even while he had been so engaged, his mind had been considering the newcomer with 
a gentle expectation. A youth, a student, one of those who might take over, eventually. 

The young man stood uncertainly at the door, so that the First Speaker had to walk to him and 
lead him in, with a friendly hand upon the shoulder. 

The Student smiled shyly, and the First Speaker responded by saying, "First, I must tell you 
why you are here." 

They faced each other now, across the desk. Neither was speaking in any way that could be 
recognized as such by any man in the Galaxy who was not himself a member of the Second 
Foundation. 

Speech, originally, was the device whereby Man learned, imperfectly, to transmit the thoughts 
and emotions of his mind. By setting up arbitrary sounds and combinations of sounds to 
represent certain mental nuances, be developed a method of communication - but one which 
in its clumsiness and thick-thumbed inadequacy degenerated all the delicacy of the mind into 
gross and guttural signaling. 

Down- down- the results can be followed; and all the suffering that humanity ever knew can be 
traced to the one fact that no man in the history of the Galaxy, until Hari Seldon, and very few 
men thereafter, could really understand one another. Every human being lived behind an 
impenetrable wall of choking mist within which no other but he existed. Occasionally there were 
the dim signals from deep within the cavern in which another man was located-so that each 



might grope toward the other. Yet because they did not know one another, and could not 
understand one another, and dared not trust one another, and felt from infancy the terrors and 
insecurity of that ultimate isolation - there was the hunted fear of man for man, the savage 
rapacity of man toward man. 

Feet, for tens of thousands of years, had clogged and shuffled in the mud - and held down the 
minds which, for an equal time, had been fit for the companionship of the stars. 

Grimly, Man had instinctively sought to circumvent the prison bars of ordinary speech. 
Semantics, symbolic logic, psychoanalysis - they had all been devices whereby speech could 
either be refined or by-passed. 

Psychohistory had been the development of mental science, the final mathematicization 
thereof, rather, which had finally succeeded. Through the development of the mathematics 
necessary to understand the facts of neural physiology and the electrochemistry of the nervous 
system, which themselves had to be, had to be, traced down to nuclear forces, it first became 
possible to truly develop psychology. And through the generalization of psychological 
knowledge from the individual to the group, sociology was also mathematicized. 

The larger groups; the billions that occupied planets; the trillions that occupied Sectors; the 
quadrillions that occupied the whole Galaxy, became, not simply human beings, but gigantic 
forces amenable to statistical treatment - so that to Hari Seldon, the future became clear and 
inevitable, and the Plan could be set up. 

The same basic developments of mental science that had brought about the development of 
the Seldon Plan, thus made it also unnecessary for the First Speaker to use words in 
addressing the Student. 

Every reaction to a stimulus, however slight, was completely indicative of all the trifling 
changes, of all the flickering currents that went on in another's mind. The First Speaker could 
not sense the emotional content of the Student's instinctively, as the Mule would have been 
able to do - since the Mule was a mutant with powers not ever likely to become completely 
comprehensible to any ordinary man, even a Second Foundationer - rather he deduced them, 
as the result of intensive training. 

Since, however, it is inherently impossible in a society based on speech to indicate truly the 
method of communication of Second Foundationers among themselves, the whole matter will 
be hereafter ignored. The First Speaker will be represented as speaking in ordinary fashion, 
and if the translation is not always entirely valid, it is at least the best that can be done under 
the circumstances. 

It will be pretended therefore, that the First Speaker did actually say, "First, I must tell you why 
you are here," instead of smiling just so and lifting a finger exactly thus. 

The First Speaker said, "You have studied mental science hard and well for most of your life. 
You have absorbed all your teachers could give you. It is time for you and a few others like 
yourself to begin your apprenticeship for Speakerhood." 

Agitation from the other side of the desk. 



"No - now you must take this phlegmatically. You had hoped you would qualify. You had feared 
you would not. Actually, both hope and fear are weaknesses. You knew you would qualify and 
you hesitate to admit the fact because such knowledge might stamp you as cocksure and 
therefore unfit. Nonsense! The most hopelessly stupid man is he who is not aware that he is 
wise. It is part of your qualification that you knew you would qualify." 

Relaxation on the other side of the desk. 

"Exactly. Now you feel better and your guard is down. You are fitter to concentrate and fitter to 
understand. Remember, to be truly effective, it is not necessary to hold the mind under a tight, 
controlling barrier which to the intelligent probe is as informative as a naked mentality. Rather, 
one should cultivate an innocence, an awareness of self, and an unself-consciousness of self 
which leaves one nothing to hide. My mind is open to you. Let this be so for both of us." 

He went on. "It is not an easy thing to be a Speaker. It is not an easy thing to be a 
Psychohistorian in the first place; and not even the best Psychohistorian need necessarily 
qualify to be a Speaker. There is a distinction here. A Speaker must not only be aware of the 
mathematical intricacies of the Seldon Plan; he must have a sympathy for it and for its ends. He 
must love the Plan; to him it must be life and breath. More than that it must even be as a living 
friend. 

"Do you know what this is?" 

The First Speaker's hand hovered gently over the black, shining cube in the middle of the desk. 
It was featureless. 

"No, Speaker, I do not." 

"You have heard of the Prime Radiant?" 

"This?" -Astonishment. 

"You expected something more noble and awe-inspiring? Well, that is natural. It was created in 
the days of the Empire, by men of Seldon's time. For nearly four hundred years, it has served 
our needs perfectly, without requiring repairs or adjustment. And fortunately so, since none of 
the Second Foundation is qualified to handle it in any technical fashion." He smiled gently. 
"Those of the First Foundation might be able to duplicate this, but they must never know, of 
course." 

He depressed a lever on his side of the desk and the room was in darkness. But only for a 
moment, since with a gradually livening flush, the two long walls of the room glowed to life. 

First, a pearly white, unrelieved, then a trace of faint darkness here and there, and finally, the 
fine neatly printed equations in black, with an occasional red hairline that wavered through the 
darker forest like a staggering rillet. 

"Come, my boy, step here before the wall. You will not cast a shadow. This light does not 
radiate from the Radiant in an ordinary manner. To tell you the truth, I do not know even faintly 
by what medium this effect is produced, but you will not cast a shadow. I know that." 

They stood together in the light. Each wall was thirty feet long, and ten high. The writing was 



small and covered every inch. 

"This is not the whole Plan," said the First Speaker. "To get it all upon both walls, the individual 
equations would have to be reduced to microscopic size - but that is not necessary. What you 
now see represents the main portions of the Plan till now. You have learned about this, have 
you not?" 

"Yes, Speaker, I have." 

"Do you recognize any portion." 

A slow silence. The student pointed a finger and as he did so, the line of equations marched 
down the wall, until the single series of functions he had thought of - one could scarcely 
consider the quick, generalized gesture of the finger to have been sufficiently precise - was at 
eye-level. 

The First Speaker laughed softly, "You will find the Prime Radiant to be attuned to your mind. 
You may expect more surprises from the little gadget. What were you about to say about the 
equation you have chosen?" 

"It," faltered the Student, "is a Rigellian integral, using a planetary distribution of a bias 
indicating the presence of two chief economic classes on the planet, or maybe a Sector, plus 
an unstable emotional pattern." 

"And what does it signify?" 

"It represents the limit of tension, since we have here" - he pointed, and again the equations 
veered - "a converging series." 

"Good," said the First Speaker. "And tell me, what do you think of all this. A finished work of art, 
is it not?" 

"Definitely!" 

"Wrong! It is not." This, with sharpness. "It is the first lesson you must unlearn. The Seldon Plan 
is neither complete nor correct. Instead, it is merely the best that could be done at the time. 
Over a dozen generations of men have pored over these equations, worked at them, taken 
them apart to the last decimal place, and put them together again. They've done more than 
that. They've watched nearly four hundred years pass and against the predictions and 
equations, they've checked reality, and they have learned. 

"They have learned more than Seldon ever knew, and if with the accumulated knowledge of the 
centuries we could repeat Seldon's work, we could do a better job. Is that perfectly clear to 
you?" 

The Student appeared a little shocked. 

"Before you obtain your Speakerhood," continued the First Speaker, "you yourself will have to 
make an original contribution to the Plan. It is not such great blasphemy. Every red mark you 
see on the wall is the contribution of a man among us who lived since Seldon. Why ... why-" Fie 
looked upward, "There!" 



The whole wall seemed to whirl down upon him. 

"This," he said, "is mine." A fine red line encircled two forking arrows and included six square 
feet of deductions along each path. Between the two were a series of equations in red. 

"It does not," said the Speaker, "seem to be much. It is at a point in the Plan which we will not 
reach yet for a time as long as that which has already passed. It is at the period of 
coalescence, when the Second Empire that is to be is in the grip of rival personalities who will 
threaten to pull it apart if the fight is too even, or clamp it into rigidity, if the fight is too uneven. 
Both possibilities are considered here, followed, and the method of avoiding either indicated. 

"Yet it is all a matter of probabilities and a third course can exist. It is one of comparatively low 
likelihood - twelve point six four percent, to be exact - but even smaller chances have already 
come to pass and the Plan is only forty percent complete. This third probability consists of a 
possible compromise between two or more of the conflicting personalities being considered. 
This, I showed, would first freeze the Second Empire into an unprofitable mold, and then, 
eventually, inflict more damage through civil wars than would have taken place had a 
compromise never been made in the first place. Fortunately, that could be prevented, too. And 
that was my contribution." 

"If I may interrupt, Speaker- How is a change made?" 

"Through the agency of the Radiant. You will find in your own case, for instance, that your 
mathematics will be checked rigorously by five different boards; and that you will be required to 
defend it against a concerted and merciless attack. Two years will then pass, and your 
development will be reviewed again. It has happened more than once that a seemingly perfect 
piece of work has uncovered its fallacies only after an induction period of months or years. 
Sometimes, the contributor himself discovers the flaw. 

"If, after two years, another examination, not less detailed than the first, still passes it, and - 
better still - if in the interim the young scientist has brought to light additional details, subsidiary 
evidence, the contribution will be added to the Plan. It was the climax of my career; it will be the 
climax of yours. 

"The Prime Radiant can be adjusted to your mind, and all corrections and additions can be 
made through mental rapport. There will be nothing to indicate that the correction or addition is 
yours. In all the history of the Plan there has been no personalization. It is rather a creation of 
all of us together. Do you understand?" 

"Yes, Speaker!" 

"Then, enough of that." A stride to the Prime Radiant, and the walls were blank again save for 
the ordinary room-lighting region along the upper borders. "Sit down here at my desk, and let 
me talk to you. It is enough for a Psychohistorian, as such, to know his Biostatistics and his 
Neurochemical Electromathematics. Some know nothing else and are fit only to be statistical 
technicians. But a Speaker must be able to discuss the Plan without mathematics. If not the 
Plan itself, at least its philosophy and its aims. 

"First of all, what is the aim of the Plan? Please tell me in your own words - and don't grope for 



fine sentiment. You won't be judged on polish and suavity, I assure you." 

It was the Student's first chance at more than a bisyllable, and he hesitated before plunging into 
the expectant space cleared away for him. He said, diffidently: "As a result of what I have 
learned, I believe that it is the intention of the Plan to establish a human civilization based on an 
orientation entirely different from anything that ever before existed. An orientation which, 
according to the findings of Psychohistory, could never spontaneously come into being-" 

"Stop!" The First Speaker was insistent. 'You must not say 'never.' That is a lazy slurring over of 
the facts. Actually, Psychohistory predicts only probabilities. A particular event may be 
infinitesimally probable, but the probability is always greater than zero." 

"Yes, Speaker. The orientation desired, if I may correct myself, then, is well known to possess 
no significant probability of spontaneously coming to pass." 

"Better. What is the orientation?" 

"It is that of a civilization based on mental science. In all the known history of Mankind, 
advances have been made primarily in physical technology; in the capacity of handling the 
inanimate world about Man. Control of self and society has been left to chance or to the vague 
gropings of intuitive ethical systems based on inspiration and emotion. As a result, no culture of 
greater stability than about fifty-five percent has ever existed, and these only as the result of 
great human misery." 

"And why is the orientation we speak of a nonspontaneous one?" 

"Because a large minority of human beings are mentally equipped to take part in the advance 
of physical science, and all receive the crude and visible benefits thereof. Only an insignificant 
minority, however, are inherently able to lead Man through the greater involvements of Mental 
Science; and the benefits derived therefrom, while longer lasting, are more subtle and less 
apparent. Furthermore, since such an orientation would lead to the development of a 
benevolent dictatorship of the mentally best - virtually a higher subdivision of Man - it would be 
resented and could not be stable without the application of a force which would depress the 
rest of Mankind to brute level. Such a development is repugnant to us and must be avoided." 

"What, then, is the solution?" 

"The solution is the Seldon Plan. Conditions have been so arranged and so maintained that in a 
millennium from its beginnings - six hundred years from now, a Second Galactic Empire will 
have been established in which Mankind will be ready for the leadership of Mental Science. In 
that same interval, the Second Foundation in its development, will have brought forth a group of 
Psychologists ready to assume leadership. Or, as I have myself often thought, the First 
Foundation supplies the physical framework of a single political unit, and the Second 
Foundation supplies the mental framework of a ready-made ruling class." 

"I see. Fairly adequate. Do you think that any Second Empire, even if formed in the time set by 
Seldon, would do as a fulfillment of his Plan?" 

"No, Speaker, I do not. There are several possible Second Empires that may be formed in the 
period of time stretching from nine hundred to seventeen hundred years after the inception of 



the Plan, but only one of these is the Second Empire." 

"And in view of all this, why is it necessary that the existence of the Second Foundation be 
hidden - above all, from the First Foundation?" 

The Student probed for a hidden meaning to the question and failed to find it. Fie was troubled 
in his answer, "For the same reason that the details of the Plan as a whole must be hidden from 
Mankind in general. The laws of Psychohistory are statistical in nature and are rendered invalid 
if the actions of individual men are not random in nature. If a sizable group of human beings 
learned of key details of the Plan, their actions would be governed by that knowledge and 
would no longer be random in the meaning of the axioms of Psychohistory. In other words, they 
would no longer be perfectly predictable. Your pardon, Speaker, but I feel that the answer is not 
satisfactory." 

"It is well that you do. Your answer is quite incomplete. It is the Second Foundation itself which 
must be hidden, not simply the Plan. The Second Empire is not yet formed. We have still a 
society which would resent a ruling class of psychologists, and which would fear its 
development and fight against it. Do you understand that?" 

"Yes, Speaker, I do. The point has never been stressed-" 

"Don't minimize. It has never been made - in the classroom, though you should be capable of 
deducing it yourself. This and many other points we will make now and in the near future during 
your apprenticeship. You will see me again in a week. By that time, I would like to have 
comments from you as to a certain problem which I now set before you. I don't want complete 
and rigorous mathematical treatment. That would take a year for an expert, and not a week for 
you. But I do want an indication as to trends and directions 

"You have here a fork in the Plan at a period in time of about half a century ago. The necessary 
details are included. You will note that the path followed by the assumed reality diverges from 
all the plotted predictions; its probability being under one percent. You will estimate for how 
long the divergence may continue before it becomes uncorrectable. Estimate also the probable 
end if uncorrected, and a reasonable method of correction." 

The Student flipped the Viewer at random and looked stonily at the passages presented on the 
tiny, built-in screen. 

Fie said: "Why this particular problem, Speaker? It obviously has significance other than purely 
academic." 

"Thank you, my boy. You are as quick as I had expected. The problem is not supposititious. 
Nearly half a century ago, the Mule burst into Galactic history and for ten years was the largest 
single fact in the universe. Fie was unprovided for; uncalculated for. Fie bent the Plan seriously, 
but not fatally. 

"To stop him before he did become fatal, however, we were forced to take active part against 
him. We revealed our existence, and infinitely worse, a portion of our power. The First 
Foundation has learned of us, and their actions are now predicated on that knowledge. 

Observe in the problem presented. Here. And here. 



"Naturally, you will not speak of this to anyone." 

There was an appalled pause, as realization seeped into the Student. He said: "Then the 
Seldon Plan has failed!" 

"Not yet. It merely may have failed. The probabilities of success are still twenty-one point four 
percent, as of the last assessment." 


9 

The Conspirators 

For Dr. Darell and Pelleas Anthor, the evenings passed in friendly intercourse; the days in 
pleasant unimportance. It might have been an ordinary visit. Dr. Darell introduced the young 
man as a cousin from across space, and interest was dulled by the cliche. 

Somehow, however, among the small talk, a name might be mentioned. There would be an 
easy thoughtfulness. Dr. Darell might say, "No," or he might say, "Yes." A call on the open 
Communi-wave issued a casual invitation, "Want you to meet my cousin." 

And Arcadia's preparations proceeded in their own manner. In fact, her actions might be 
considered the least straightforward of all. 

For instance, she induced Olynthus Dam at school to donate to her a home-built, self-contained 
sound-receiver by methods which indicated a future for her that promised peril to all males with 
whom she might come into contact. To avoid details, she merely exhibited such an interest in 
Olynthus' self-publicized hobby - he had a home workshop-combined with such a 
well-modulated transfer of this interest to Olynthus' own pudgy features, that the unfortunate 
youth found himself: 1 ) discoursing at great and animated length upon the principles of the 
hyperwave motor; 2) becoming dizzyingly aware of the great, absorbed eyes that rested so 
lightly upon his; and 3) forcing into her willing hands his own greatest creation, the aforesaid 
sound-receiver. 

Arcadia cultivated Olynthus in diminishing degree thereafter for just long enough to remove all 
suspicion that the sound-receiver had been the cause of the friendship. For months afterwards, 
Olynthus felt the memory of that short period in his life over and over again with the tendrils of 
his mind, until finally, for lack of further addition, he gave up and let it slip away. 

When the seventh evening came, and five men sat in the Darell living room with food within and 
tobacco without, Arcadia's desk upstairs was occupied by this quite unrecognizable 
home-product of Olynthus' ingenuity. 

Five men then. Dr. Darell, of course, with graying hair and meticulous clothing, looking 
somewhat older than his forty-two years. Pelleas Author, serious and quick-eyed at the moment 
looking young and unsure of himself. And the three new men: Jole Turbor, visicastor, bulky and 
plump-lipped; Dr. Elvett Semic, professor-emeritus of physics at the University, scrawny and 
wrinkled, his clothes only half-filled; Homir Munn, librarian, lanky and terribly ill-at-ease. 



Dr. Darell spoke easily, in a normal, matter-of-fact tone: "This gathering has been arranged, 
gentlemen, for a trifle more than merely social reasons. You may have guessed this. Since you 
have been deliberately chosen because of your backgrounds, you may also guess the danger 
involved. I won't minimize it, but I will point out that we are all condemned men, in any case. 

"You will notice that none of you have been invited with any attempt at secrecy. None of you 
have been asked to come here unseen. The windows are not adjusted to non-insight. No 
screen of any sort is about the room. We have only to attract the attention of the enemy to be 
ruined; and the best way to attract that attention is to assume a false and theatrical secrecy. 

(Hah, thought Arcadia, bending over the voices coming - a bit screechily - out of the little box.) 

"Do you understand that?" 

Elvett Semic twitched his lower lip and bared his teeth in the screwup, wrinkled gesture that 
preceded his every sentence. "Oh, get on with it. Tell us about the youngster." 

Dr. Darell said, "Pelleas Anthor is his name. He was a student of my old colleague, Kleise, who 
died last year. Kleise sent me his brain-pattern to the fifth sublevel, before he died, which 
pattern has been now checked against that of the man before you. You know, of course, that a 
brain-pattern cannot be duplicated that far, even by men of the Science of Psychology. If you 
don't know that, you'll have to take my word for it." 

Turbor said, purse-lipped, "We might as well make a beginning somewheres. We'll take your 
word for it, especially since you're the greatest electroneurologist in the Galaxy now that Kleise 
is dead. At least, that is the way I've described you in my visicast comment, and I even believe 
it myself. How old are you, Anthor?" 

"Twenty-nine, Mr. Turbor." 

"Hm-m-m. And are you an electroneurologist, too? A great one?" 

"Just a student of the science. But I work hard, and I've had the benefit of Kleise's training." 

Munn broke in. He had a slight stammer at periods of tension. "I ... I wish you'd g ... get started. 
I think everyone's t ... talking too much." 

Dr. Darell lifted an eyebrow in Munn's direction, you're right, Homir. Take over, Pelleas." 

"Not for a while," said Pelleas Anthor, slowly, "because before we can get started - although I 
appreciate Mr. Munn's sentiment - I must request brain-wave data." 

Darell frowned. "What is this, Anthor? What brain-wave data do you refer to?" 

"The patterns of all of you. You have taken mine, Dr. Darell. I must take yours and those of the 
rest of you. And I must take the measurements myself." 

Turbor said, "There's no reason for him to trust us, Darell. The young man is within his rights." 

"Thank you," said Anthor. "If you’ll lead the way to your laboratory then, Dr. Darell, well 
proceed. I took the liberty this morning of checking your apparatus." 



The science of electroencephalography was at once new and old. It was old in the sense that 
the knowledge of the microcurrents generated by nerve cells of living beings belonged to that 
immense category of human knowledge whose origin was completely lost It was knowledge 
that stretched back as far as the earliest remnants of human history— 

And yet it was new, too. The fact of the existence of microcurrents slumbered through the tens 
of thousands of years of Galactic Empire as one of those vivid and whimsical, but quite 
useless, items of human knowledge. Some had attempted to form classifications of waves into 
waking and sleeping, calm and excited, well and ill - but even the broadest conceptions had 
had their hordes of vitiating exceptions. 

Others had tried to show the existence of brain-wave groups, analogous to the well-known 
blood groups, and to show that external environment was the defining factor. These were the 
race-minded people who claimed that Man could be divided into subspecies. But such a 
philosophy could make no headway against the overwhelming ecumenical drive involved in the 
fact of Galactic Empire - one political unit covering twenty million stellar systems, involving all 
of Man from the central world of Trantor - now a gorgeous and impossible memory of the great 
past - to the loneliest asteroid on the periphery. 

And then again, in a society given over, as that of the First Empire was, to the physical 
sciences and inanimate technology, there was a vague but mighty sociological push away from 
the study of the mind. It was less respectable because less immediately useful; and it was 
poorly financed since it was less profitable. 

After the disintegration of the First Empire, there came the fragmentation of organized science, 
back, back - past even the fundamentals of atomic power into the chemical power of coal and 
oil. The one exception to this, of course, was the First Foundation where the spark of science, 
revitalized and grown more intense was maintained and fed to flame. Yet there, too, it was the 
physical that ruled, and the brain, except for surgery, was neglected ground. 

Hari Seldon was the first to express what afterwards came to be accepted as truth. 

"Neural microcurrents," he once said, "carry within them the spark of every varying impulse and 
response, conscious and unconscious. The brain-waves recorded on neatly squared paper in 
trembling peaks and troughs are the mirrors of the combined thought-pulses of billions of cells. 
Theoretically, analysis should reveal the thoughts and emotions of the subject, to the last and 
least. Differences should be detected that are due not only to gross physical defects, inherited 
or acquired, but also to shifting states of emotion, to advancing education and experience, even 
to something as subtle as a change in the subject's philosophy of life." 

But even Seldon could approach no further than speculation. 

And now for fifty years, the men of the First Foundation had been tearing at that incredibly vast 
and complicated storehouse of new knowledge. The approach, naturally, was made through 
new techniques - as, for example, the use of electrodes at skull sutures by a newly-developed 
means which enabled contact to be made directly with the gray cells, without even the 
necessity of shaving a patch of skull. And then there was a recording device which 
automatically recorded the brain-wave data as an overall total, and as separate functions of six 



independent variables. 

What was most significant, perhaps, was the growing respect in which encephalography and 
the encephalographer was held. Kleise, the greatest of them, sat at scientific conventions on an 
equal basis with the physicist. Dr. Darell, though no longer active in the science, was known for 
his brilliant advances in encephalographic analysis almost as much as for the fact that he was 
the son of Bayta Darell, the great heroine of the past generation. 

And so now, Dr. Darell sat in his own chair, with the delicate touch of the feathery electrodes 
scarcely hinting at pressure upon his skull, while the vacuum-incased needles wavered to and 
fro. His back was to the recorder - otherwise, as was well known, the sight of the moving 
curves induced an unconscious effort to control them, with noticeable results - but he knew that 
the central dial was expressing the strongly rhythmic and little-varying Sigma curve, which was 
to be expected of his own powerful and disciplined mind. It would be strengthened and purified 
in the subsidiary dial dealing with the Cerebellar wave. There would be the sharp, 
near-discontinuous leaps from the frontal lobe, and the subdued shakiness from the subsurface 
regions with its narrow range of frequencies- 

He knew his own brain-wave pattern much as an artist might be perfectly aware of the color of 
his eyes. 

Pelleas Anthor made no comment when Darell rose from the reclining chair. The young man 
abstracted the seven recordings, glanced at them with the quick, all-embracing eyes of one 
who knows exactly what tiny facet of near-nothingness is being looked for. 

"If you don't mind, Dr. Semic." 

Semic's age-yellowed face was serious. Electroencephalography was a science of his old age 
of which he knew little; an upstart that he faintly resented. He knew that he was old and that his 
wave-pattern would show it. The wrinkles on his face showed it, the stoop in his walk, the 
shaking of his hand - but they spoke only of his body. The brain-wave patterns might show that 
his mind was old, too. An embarrassing and unwarranted invasion of a man's last protecting 
stronghold, his own mind. 

The electrodes were adjusted. The process did not hurt, of course, from beginning to end. 

There was just that tiny tingle, far below the threshold of sensation. 

And then came Turbor, who sat quietly and unemotionally through the fifteen minute process, 
and Munn, who jerked at the first touch of the electrodes and then spent the session rolling his 
eyes as though he wished he could turn them backwards and watch through a hole in his 
occiput. 

"And now-" said Darell, when all was done. 

"And now," said Anthor, apologetically, "there is one more person in the house." 

Darell, frowning, said: "My daughter?" 

'Yes. I suggested that she stay home tonight, if you'll remember." 



"For encephalographical analysis? What in the Galaxy for?" 

"I cannot proceed without it." 

Darell shrugged and climbed the stairs. Arcadia, amply warned, had the sound-receiver off 
when he entered; then followed him down with mild obedience. It was the first time in her life - 
except for the taking of her basic mind pattern as an infant, for identification and registration 
purposes - that she found herself under the electrodes. 

"May I see," she asked, when it was over, holding out her hand. 

Dr. Darell said, "You would not understand, Arcadia. Isn't it time for you to go to bed?" 

"Yes, father," she said, demurely. "Good night, all." 

She ran up the stairs and plumped into bed with a minimum of basic preparation. With 
Olynthus' sound-receiver propped beside her pillow, she felt like a character out of a book-film, 
and hugged every moment of it close to her chest in an ecstasy of "Spy-stuff." 

The first words she heard were Anthor's and they were: "The analyses, gentlemen, are all 
satisfactory. The child's as well." 

Child, she thought disgustedly, and bristled at Anthor in the darkness. 

Anthor had opened his briefcase now, and out of it, he took several dozen brain-wave records. 
They were not originals. Nor had the briefcase been fitted with an ordinary lock. Had the key 
been held in any hand other than his own, the contents thereof would have silently and instantly 
oxidized to an indecipherable ash. Once removed from the briefcase, the records did so 
anyway after half an hour. 

But during their short lifetime, Anthor spoke quickly. "I have the records here of several minor 
government officials at Anacreon. This is a psychologist at Locris University; this an industrialist 
at Siwenna. The rest are as you see." 

They crowded closely. To all but Darell, they were so many quivers on parchment. To Darell, 
they shouted with a million tongues. 

Anthor pointed lightly, "I call your attention, Dr. Darell, to the plateau region among the 
secondary Tauian waves in the frontal lobe, which is what all these records have in common. 
Would you use my Analytical Rule, sir, to check my statement?" 

The Analytical Rule might be considered a distant relation - as a skyscraper is to a shack - of 
that kindergarten toy, the logarithmic Slide Rule. Darell used it with the wristflip of long practice. 
He made freehand drawings of the result and, as Anthor stated, there were featureless 
plateaus in frontal lobe regions where strong swings should have been expected. 

"How would you interpret that, Dr. Darell?" asked Anthor. 

"I'm not sure. Offhand, I don't see how it's possible. Even in cases of amnesia, there is 
suppression, but not removal. Drastic brain surgery, perhaps?" 

"Oh, something's been cut out," cried Anthor, impatiently, "yes! Not in the physical sense, 



however. You know, the Mule could have done just that. He could have suppressed completely 
all capacity for a certain emotion or attitude of mind, and leave nothing but just such a flatness. 
Or else-" 

"Or else the Second Foundation could have done it. Is that it?" asked Turbor, with a slow smile. 
There was no real need to answer that thoroughly rhetorical question. 

"What made you suspicious, Mr. Anthor?" asked Munn. 

"It wasn't I. It was Dr. Kleise. He collected brain-wave patterns much as the Planetary Police 
do, but along different lines. He specialized in intellectuals, government officials and business 
leaders. You see, it's quite obvious that if the Second Foundation is directing the historical 
course of the Galaxy - of us - that they must do it subtly and in as minimal a fashion as 
possible. If they work through minds, as they must, it is the minds of people with influence; 
culturally, industrially, or politically. And with those he concerned himself." 

"Yes," objected Munn, "but is there corroboration? How do these people act - I mean the ones 
with the plateau. Maybe it's all a perfectly normal phenomenon." He looked hopelessly at the 
others out of his, somehow, childlike blue eyes, but met no encouraging return. 

"I leave that to Dr. Darell," said Anthor. "Ask him how many times he's seen this phenomenon 
in his general studies, or in reported cases in the literature over the past generation. Then ask 
him the chances of it being discovered in almost one out of every thousand cases among the 
categories Dr. Kleise studied." 

"I suppose that there is no doubt," said Darell, thoughtfully, "that these are artificial mentalities. 
They have been tampered with. In a way, I have suspected this-" 

"I know that, Dr. Darell," said Author. "I also know you once worked with Dr. Kleise. I would like 
to know why you stopped." 

There wasn't actually hostility in his question. Perhaps nothing more than caution; but, at any 
rate, it resulted in a long pause. Darell looked from one to another of his guests, then said 
brusquely, "Because there was no point to Kleise's battle. He was competing with an adversary 
too strong for him. He was detecting what we - he and I - knew he would detect - that we were 
not our own masters. And I didn't want to know! I had my self-respect. I liked to think that our 
Foundation was captain of its collective soul; that our forefathers had not quite fought and died 
for nothing. I thought it would be most simple to turn my face away as long as I was not quite 
sure. I didn't need my position since the Government pension awarded to my mother's family in 
perpetuity would take care of my uncomplicated needs. My home laboratory would suffice to 
keep boredom away, and life would some day end- Then Kleise died-" 

Semic showed his teeth and said: "This fellow Kleise; I don't know him. How did he die?" 

Anthor cut in: "He died. He thought he would. He told me half a year before that he was getting 
too close-" 

"Now we're too c ... close, too, aren't we?" suggested Munn, dry-mouthed, as his Adam's apple 
jiggled. 



"Yes," said Anthor, flatly, "but we were, anyway - all of us. It's why you've all been chosen. I'm 
Kleise's student. Dr. Darell was his colleague. Jole Turbor has been denouncing our blind faith 
in the saving hand of the Second Foundation on the air, until the government shut him off - 
through the agency, I might mention, of a powerful financier whose brain shows what Kleise 
used to call the Tamper Plateau. Homir Munn has the largest home collection of Muliana - if I 
may use the phrase to signify collected data concerning the Mule - in existence, and has 
published some papers containing speculation on the nature and function of the Second 
Foundation. Dr. Semic has contributed as much as anyone to the mathematics of 
encephalographic analysis, though I don't believe he realized that his mathematics could be so 
applied." 

Semic opened his eyes wide and chuckled gaspingly, "No, young fellow. I was analyzing 
intranuclear motions - the n-body problem, you know. I'm lost in encephalography." 

"Then we know where we stand. The government can, of course, do nothing about the matter. 
Whether the mayor or anyone in his administration is aware of the seriousness of the situation, 

I don't know. But this I do know - we five have nothing to lose and stand to gain much. With 
every increase in our knowledge, we can widen ourselves in safe directions. We are but a 
beginning, you understand." 

"Flow widespread," put in Turbor, "is this Second Foundation infiltration?" 

"I don't know. There's a flat answer. All the infiltrations we have discovered were on the outer 
fringes of the nation. The capital world may yet be clean, though even that is not certain - else I 
would not have tested you. You were particularly suspicious, Dr. Darell, since you abandoned 
research with Kleise. Kleise never forgave you, you know. I thought that perhaps the Second 
Foundation had corrupted you, but Kleise always insisted that you were a coward. You'll forgive 
me, Dr. Darell, if I explain this to make my own position clear. I, personally, think I understand 
your attitude, and, if it was cowardice, I consider it venial." 

Darell drew a breath before replying. "I ran away! Call it what you wish. I tried to maintain our 
friendship, however, yet he never wrote nor called me until the day he sent me your brainwave 
data, and that was scarcely a week before he died-" 

"If you don't mind," interrupted Flomir Munn, with a flash of nervous eloquence, "I d ... don't see 
what you think you're doing. We're a p ... poor bunch of conspirators, if we're just going to talk 
and talk and t ... talk. And I don't see what else we can do, anyway. This is v ... very childish. B 
... brain-waves and mumbo jumbo and all that. Is there just one thing you intend to do?' 

Pelleas Author's eyes were bright, "Yes, there is. We need more information on the Second 
Foundation. It's the prime necessity. The Mule spent the first five years of his rule in just that 
quest for information and failed - or so we have all been led to believe. But then he stopped 
looking. Why? Because he failed? Or because he succeeded?" 

"M ... more talk," said Munn, bitterly. "Flow are we ever to know?" 

"If you'll listen to me- The Mule's capital was on Kalgan. Kalgan was not part of the 
Foundation's commercial sphere of influence before the Mule and it is not part of it now. Kalgan 
is ruled, at the moment, by the man, Stettin, unless there's another palace revolution by 



tomorrow. Stettin calls himself First Citizen and considers himself the successor of the Mule. If 
there is any tradition in that world, it rests with the super-humanity and greatness of the Mule - 
a tradition almost superstitious in intensity. As a result, the Mule's old palace is maintained as a 
shrine. No unauthorized person may enter; nothing within has ever been touched." 

"Well?" 

"Well, why is that so? At times like these, nothing happens without a reason. What if it is not 
superstition only that makes the Mule's palace inviolate? What if the Second Foundation has so 
arranged matters? In short what if the results of the Mule's five-year search are within-" 

"Oh, p ... poppycock." 

"Why not?" demanded Anthor. "Throughout its history the Second Foundation has hidden itself 
and interfered in Galactic affairs in minimal fashion only. I know that to us it would seem more 
logical to destroy the Palace or, at the least, to remove the data. But you must consider the 
psychology of these master psychologists. They are Seldons; they are Mules and they work by 
indirection, through the mind. They would never destroy or remove when they could achieve 
their ends by creating a state of mind. Eh?" 

No immediate answer, and Anthor continued, "And you, Munn, are just the one to get the 
information we need." 

"I?" It was an astounded yell. Munn looked from one to the other rapidly, "I can't do such a 
thing. I'm no man of action; no hero of any teleview. I'm a librarian. If I can help you that way, all 
right, and I'll risk the Second Foundation, but I'm not going out into space on any qu ... quixotic 
thing like that." 

"Now, look," said Anthor, patiently, "Dr. Darell and I have both agreed that you're the man. It's 
the only way to do it naturally. You say you're a librarian. Fine! What is your main field of 
interest? Muliana! You already have the greatest collection of material on the Mule in the 
Galaxy. It is natural for you to want more; more natural for you than for anyone else. You could 
request entrance to the Kalgan Palace without arousing suspicion of ulterior motives. You might 
be refused but you would not be suspected. What's more, you have a one-man cruiser. You're 
known to have visited foreign planets during your annual vacation. You've even been on Kalgan 
before. Don't you understand that you need only act as you always have?" 

"But I can't just say, 'W ... won't you kindly let me in to your most sacred shrine, M ... Mr. First 
Citizen?’" 

"Why not?" 

"Because, by the Galaxy, he won't let me!" 

"All right, then. So he won't Then you'll come home and we’ll think of something else." 

Munn looked about in helpless rebellion. Fie felt himself being talked into something he hated. 
No one offered to help him extricate himself. 


So in the end two decisions were made in Dr. Darell's house. The first was a reluctant one of 



agreement on the part of Munn to take off into space as soon as his summer vacation began. 

The other was a highly unauthorized decision on the part of a thoroughly unofficial member of 
the gathering, made as she clicked off a sound-receiver and composed herself for a belated 
sleep. This second decision does not concern us just yet. 

10 

Approaching Crisis 

A week had passed on the Second Foundation, and the First Speaker was smiling once again 
upon the Student. 

"You must have brought me interesting results, or you would not be so filled with anger." 

The Student put his hand upon the sheaf of calculating paper he had brought with him and 
said, "Are you sure that the problem is a factual one?" 

"The premises are true. I have distorted nothing." 

"Then I must accept the results, and I do not want to." 

"Naturally. But what have your wants to do with it? Well, tell me what disturbs you so. No, no, 
put your derivations to one side. I will subject them to analysis afterward. Meanwhile, talkto 
me. Let me judge your understanding." 

"Well, then, Speaker- It becomes very apparent that a gross overall change in the basic 
psychology of the First Foundation has taken place. As long as they knew of the existence of a 
Seldon Plan, without knowing any of the details thereof, they were confident but uncertain. 
They knew they would succeed, but they didn't know when or how. There was, therefore, a 
continuous atmosphere of tension and strain - which was what Seldon desired. The First 
Foundation, in other words, could be counted upon to work at maximum potential." 

"A doubtful metaphor," said the First Speaker, "but I understand you." 

"But now, Speaker, they know of the existence of a Second Foundation in what amounts to 
detail, rather merely than as an ancient and vague statement of Seldon's. They have an inkling 
as to its function as the guardian of the Plan. They know that an agency exists which watches 
their every step and will not let them fall. So they abandon their purposeful stride and allow 
themselves to be carried upon a litter. Another metaphor, I'm afraid." 

"Nevertheless, go on." 

"And that very abandonment of effort; that growing inertia; that lapse into softness and into a 
decadent and hedonistic culture, means the ruin of the Plan. They must be self-propelled." 

"Is that all?" 

"No, there is more. The majority reaction is as described. But a great probability exists for a 



minority reaction. Knowledge of our guardianship and our control will rouse among a few, not 
complacence, but hostility. This follows from Korillov's Theorem-" 

"Yes, yes. I know the theorem." 

"I'm sorry, Speaker. It is difficult to avoid mathematics. In any case, the effect is that not only is 
the Foundation's effort diluted, but part of it is turned against us, actively against us." 

"And is that all?" 

"There remains one other factor of which the probability is moderately low—" 

"Very good. What is that?" 

"While the energies of the First Foundation were directed only to Empire; while their only 
enemies were huge and outmoded hulks that remained from the shambles of the past, they 
were obviously concerned only with the physical sciences. With us forming a new, large part of 
their environment, a change in view may well be imposed on them. They may try to become 
psychologists-" 

"That change," said the First Speaker, coolly , " has already taken place." 

The Student's lips compressed themselves into a pale line. "Then all is over. It is the basic 
incompatibility with the Plan. Speaker, would I have known of this if I had lived - outside?" 

The First Speaker spoke seriously, "You feel humiliated, my young man, because, thinking you 
understood so much so well, you suddenly find that many very apparent things were unknown 
to you. Thinking you were one of the Lords of the Galaxy; you suddenly find that you stand near 
to destruction. Naturally, you will resent the ivory tower in which you lived; the seclusion in 
which you were educated; the theories on which you were reared. 

"I once had that feeling. It is normal. Yet it was necessary that in your formative years you have 
no direct contact with the Galaxy, that you remain here, where all knowledge is filtered to you, 
and your mind carefully sharpened. We could have shown you this ... this part-failure of the 
Plan earlier and spared you the shock now, but you would not have understood the significance 
properly, as you now will. Then you find no solution at all to the problem?" 

The Student shook his head and said hopelessly, "None!" 

"Well, it is not surprising. Listen to me, young man. A course of action exists and has been 
followed for over a decade. It is not a usual course, but one that we have been forced into 
against our will. It involves low probabilities, dangerous assumptions- We have even been 
forced to deal with individual reactions at times, because that was the only possible way, and 
you know that Psychostatistics by its very nature has no meaning when applied to less than 
planetary numbers." 

"Are we succeeding?" gasped the Student. 

"There's no way of telling yet. We have kept the situation stable so far - but for the first time in 
the history of the Plan, it is possible for the unexpected actions of a single individual to destroy 
it. We have adjusted a minimum number of outsiders to a needful state of mind; we have our 



agents - but their paths are planned. They dare not improvise. That should be obvious to you. 
And I will not conceal the worst - if we are discovered, here, on this world, it will not only be the 
Plan that is destroyed, but ourselves, our physical selves. So you see, our solution is not very 
good." 

"But the little you have described does not sound like a solution at all, but like a desperate 
guess." 

"No. Let us say, an intelligent guess." 

"When is the crisis, Speaker? When will we know whether we have succeeded or not?" 

"Well within the year, no doubt." 

The Student considered that, then nodded his head. He shook hands with the Speaker. "Well, 
it's good to know." 

He turned on his heel and left. 

The first Speaker looked out silently as the window gained transparency. Past the giant 
structures to the quite, crowding stars. 

A year would pass quickly. Would any of them, any of Seldon's heritage, be alive at its end? 

11 

Stowaway 

It was a little over a month before the summer could be said to have started. Started, that is, to 
the extent that Homir Munn had written his final financial report of the fiscal year, seen to it that 
the substitute librarian supplied by the Government was sufficiently aware of the subtleties of 
the post - last year's man had been quite unsatisfactory - and arranged to have his little cruiser 
the Unimara - named after a tender and mysterious episode of twenty years past - taken out of 
its winter cobwebbery. 

He left Terminus in a sullen distemper. No one was at the port to see him off. That would not 
have been natural since no one ever had in the past. He knew very well that it was important to 
have this trip in no way different from any he had made in the past, yet he felt drenched in a 
vague resentment. He, Homir Munn, was risking his neck in derring-doery of the most 
outrageous sort, and yet he left alone. 

At least, so he thought. 

And it was because he thought wrongly, that the following day was one of confusion, both on 
the Unimara and in Dr. Darell's suburban home. 

It hit Dr. Darell's home first, in point of time, through the medium of Poli, the maid, whose 
month's vacation was now quite a thing of the past. She flew down the stairs in a flurry and 
stutter. 



The good doctor met her and she tried vainly to put emotion into words but ended by thrusting 
a sheet of paper and a cubical object at him. 

He took them unwillingly and said: "What's wrong, Poli?" 

"She's gone, doctor." 

"Who's gone?" 

"Arcadia!" 

"What do you mean, gone? Gone where? What are you talking about?" 

And she stamped her foot: 'I don't know. She's gone, and there's a suitcase and some clothes 
gone with her and there's that letter. Why don't you read it, instead of just standing there? Oh, 
you men!" 

Dr. Darell shrugged and opened the envelope. The letter was not long, and except for the 
angular signature, "Arkady," was in the ornate and flowing handwriting of Arcadia's transcriber. 

Dear Father: 

It would have been simply too heartbreaking to say good-by to you in person. I 
might have cried like a little girl and you would have been ashamed of me. So I'm 
writing a letter instead to tell you how much III miss you, even while I'm having this 
perfectly wonderful summer vacation with Uncle Homir. Ill take good care of myself 
and it won't be long before I’m home again. Meanwhile, I'm leaving you something 
that's all my own. You can have it now. 

Your loving daughter, 

Arkady. 

He read it through several times with an expression that grew blanker each time. He said stiffly, 
"Have you read this, Poli?" 

Poli was instantly on the defensive. "I certainly can't be blamed for that, doctor. The envelope 
has 'Poli' written on the outside, and I had no way of telling there was a letter for you on the 
inside. I'm no snoop, doctor, and in the years I've been with-" 

Darell held up a placating hand, "Very well, Poli. It's not important. I just wanted to make sure 
you understood what had happened." 

He was considering rapidly. It was no use telling her to forget the matter. With regard to the 
enemy, "forget" was a meaningless word; and the advice, insofar as it made the matter more 
important, would have had an opposite effect. 

He said instead, "She's a queer little girl, you know. Very romantic. Ever since we arranged to 
have her go off on a space trip this summer, she's been quite excited." 

"And just why has no one told me about this space trip?" 



"It was arranged while you were away, and we forgot It's nothing more complicated than that." 

Poli's original emotions now concentrated themselves into a single, overwhelming indignation, 
"Simple, is it? The poor chick has gone off with one suitcase, without a decent stitch of clothes 
to her, and alone at that. How long will she be away?" 

"Now I won't have you worrying about it, Poli. There will be plenty of clothes for her on the ship. 
It's been all arranged. Will you tell Mr. Anthor, that I want to see him? Oh, and first - is this the 
object that Arcadia has left for me?" He turned it over in his hand. 

Poli tossed her head. "I'm sure I don't know. The letter was on top of it and that's every bit I can 
tell you. Forget to tell me, indeed. If her mother were alive-" 

Darell, waved her away. "Please call Mr. Anthor." 

Anthor's viewpoint on the matter differed radically from that of Arcadia's father. He punctuated 
his initial remarks with clenched fists and tom hair, and from there, passed on to bitterness. 

"Great Space, what are you waiting for? What are we both waiting for? Get the spaceport on 
the viewer and have them contact the Unimara." 

"Softly, Pelleas, she's my daughter." 

"But it's not your Galaxy." 

"Now, wait. She's an intelligent girl, Pelleas, and she's thought this thing out carefully. We had 
better follow her thoughts while this thing is fresh. Do you know what this thing is?" 

"No. Why should it matter what it is?' 

"Because it's a sound-receiver." 

"That thing?" 

"It's homemade, but it will work. I've tested it. Don't you see? It's her way of telling us that she's 
been a party to our conversations of policy. She knows where Homir Munn is going and why. 
She's decided it would be exciting to go along." 

"Oh, Great Space," groaned the younger man. "Another mind for the Second Foundation to 
pick." 

"Except that there's no reason why the Second Foundation should, a priori, suspect a 
fourteen-year-old girl of being a danger - unless we do anything to attract attention to her, such 
as calling back a ship out of space for no reason other than to take her off. Do you forget with 
whom we're dealing? How narrow the margin is that separates us from discovery? How 
helpless we are thereafter?" 

"But we can't have everything depend on an insane child." 

She's not insane, and we have no choice. She need not have written the letter, but she did it to 
keep us from going to the police after a lost child. Her letter suggests that we convert the entire 
matter into a friendly offer on the part of Munn to take an old friend's daughter off for a short 



vacation. And why not? He's been my friend for nearly twenty years. He's known her since she 
was three, when I brought her back from Trantor. It's a perfectly natural thing, and, in fact, 
ought to decrease suspicion. A spy does not carry a fourteen-year-old niece about with him." 

"So. And what will Munn do when he finds her?" 

Dr. Darell heaved his eyebrows once. "I can't say - but I presume she’ll handle him." 

But the house was somehow very lonely at night and Dr. Darell found that the fate of the 
Galaxy made remarkably little difference while his daughter's mad little life was in danger. 

The excitement on the Unimara, if involving fewer people, was considerably more intense. 

In the luggage compartment, Arcadia found herself, in the first place, aided by experience, and 
in the second, hampered by the reverse. 

Thus, she met the initial acceleration with equanimity and the more subtle nausea that 
accompanied the inside-outness of the first jump through hyperspace with stoicism. Both had 
been experienced on space hops before, and she was tensed for them. She knew also that 
luggage compartments were included in the ship's ventilation-system and that they could even 
be bathed in wall-light. This last, however, she excluded as being too unconscionably 
unromantic. She remained in the dark, as a conspirator should, breathing very softly, and 
listening to the little miscellany of noises that surrounded Homir Munn. 

They were undistinguished noises, the kind made by a man alone. The shuffling of shoes, the 
rustle of fabric against metal, the soughing of an upholstered chair seat retreating under weight, 
the sharp click of a control unit, or the soft slap of a palm over a photoelectric cell. 

Yet, eventually, it was the lack of experience that caught up with Arcadia. In the book films and 
on the videos, the stowaway seemed to have such an infinite capacity for obscurity. Of course, 
there was always the danger of dislodging something which would fall with a crash, or of 
sneezing - in videos you were almost sure to sneeze; it was an accepted matter. She knew all 
this, and was careful. There was also the realization that thirst and hunger might be 
encountered. For this, she was prepared with ration cans out of the pantry. But yet things 
remained that the films never mentioned, and it dawned upon Arcadia with a shock that, 
despite the best intentions in the world, she could stay hidden in the closet for only a limited 
time. 

And on a one-man sports-cruiser, such as the Unimara, living space consisted, essentially, of a 
single room, so that there wasn't even the risky possibility of sneaking out of the compartment 
while Munn was engaged elsewhere. 

She waited frantically for the sounds of sleep to arise. If only she knew whether he snored. At 
least she knew where the bunk was and she could recognize the rolling protest of one when 
she heard it. There was a long breath and then a yawn. She waited through a gathering 
silence, punctuated by the bunk's soft protest against a changed position or a shifted leg. 

The door of the luggage compartment opened easily at the pressure of her finger, and her 
craning neck- 



There was a definite human sound that broke off sharply. 

Arcadia solidified. Silence! Still silence! 

She tried to poke her eyes outside the door without moving her head and failed. The head 
followed the eyes. 

Homir Munn was awake, of course - reading in bed, bathed in the soft, unspreading bed light, 
staring into the darkness with wide eyes, and groping one hand stealthily under the pillow. 

Arcadia's head moved sharply back of itself. Then, the light went out entirely and Munn's voice 
said with shaky sharpness, "I've got a blaster, and I'm shooting, by the Galaxy-" 

And Arcadia wailed, "It's only me. Don't shoot." 

Remarkable what a fragile flower romance is. A gun with a nervous operator behind it can spoil 
the whole thing. 

The light was back on - all over the ship - and Munn was sitting up in bed. The somewhat 
grizzled hair on his thin chest and the sparse one-day growth on his chin lent him an entirely 
fallacious appearance of disreputability. 

Arcadia stepped out, yanking at her metallene jacket which was supposed to be guaranteed 
wrinkleproof. 

After a wild moment in which he almost jumped out of bed, but remembered, and instead 
yanked the sheet up to his shoulders, Munn gargled, "W ... wha ... what-" 

He was completely incomprehensible. 

Arcadia said meekly, "Would you excuse me for a minute? I've got to wash my hands." She 
knew the geography of the vessel, and slipped away quickly. When she returned, with her 
courage oozing back, Homir Munn was standing before her with a faded bathrobe on the 
outside and a brilliant fury on the inside. 

"What the black holes of Space are you d ... doing aboard this ship? H ... how did you get on 
here? What do you th ... think I'm supposed to do with you? What's going on here?" 

He might have asked questions indefinitely, but Arcadia interrupted sweetly, "I just wanted to 
come along, Uncle Homir." 

"Why?\'m not going anywhere?" 

"You're going to Kalgan for information about the Second Foundation." 

And Munn let out a wild howl and collapsed completely. For one horrified moment, Arcadia 
thought he would have hysterics or beat his head against the wall. He was still holding the 
blaster and her stomach grew ice-cold as she watched it. 

"Watch out-Take it easy-" was all she could think of to say. 

But he struggled back to relative normality and threw the blaster on to the bunk with a force that 



should have set it off and blown a hole through the ship's hull. 

"How did you get on?" he asked slowly, as though gripping each word with his teeth very 
carefully to prevent it from trembling before letting it out. 

"It was easy. I just came into the hangar with my suitcase, and said, 'Mr. Munn's baggage!' and 
the man in charge just waved his thumb without even looking up." 

"I'll have to take you back, you know," said Homir, and there was a sudden wild glee within him 
at the thought. By Space, this wasn't his fault. 

"You can't," said Arcadia, calmly, "it would attract attention." 

"What?" 

"You know. The whole purpose of your going to Kalgan was because it was natural for you to 
go and ask for permission to look into the Mule's records. And you've got to be so natural that 
you're to attract no attention at all. If you go back with a girl stowaway, it might even get into the 
tele-news reports." 

"Where did you g ... get those notions about Kalgan? These ... uh ... childish-" He was far too 
flippant for conviction, of course, even to one who knew less than did Arcadia. 

"I heard," she couldn't avoid pride completely, "with a sound-recorder. I know all about it - so 
you've got to let me come along." 

"What about your father?" He played a quick trump. "For all he knows, you're kidnapped ... 
dead." 

"I left a note," she said, overtrumping, "and he probably knows he mustn't make a fuss, or 
anything. You'll probably get a space-gram from him." 

To Munn the only explanation was sorcery, because the receiving signal sounded wildly two 
seconds after she finished. 

She said: "That's my father, I bet," and it was. 

The message wasn't long and it was addressed to Arcadia. It said: "Thank you for your lovely 
present, which I'm sure you put to good use. Have a good time." 

"You see," she said, "that's instructions." 

Homir grew used to her. After a while, he was glad she was there. Eventually, he wondered 
how he would have made it without her. She prattled! She was excited! Most of all, she was 
completely unconcerned. She knew the Second Foundation was the enemy, yet it didn't bother 
her. She knew that on Kalgan, he was to deal with a hostile officialdom, but she could hardly 
wait. 

Maybe it came of being fourteen. 

At any rate, the week-long trip now meant conversation rather than introspection. To be sure, it 
wasn't a very enlightening conversation, since it concerned, almost entirely, the girl's notions on 



the subject of how best to treat the Lord of Kalgan. Amusing and nonsensical, and yet delivered 
with weighty deliberation. 

Homir found himself actually capable of smiling as he listened and wondered out of just which 
gem of historical fiction she got her twisted notion of the great universe. 

It was the evening before the last jump. Kalgan was a bright star in the scarcely-twinkling 
emptiness of the outer reaches of the Galaxy. The ship's telescope made it a sparkling blob of 
barely-perceptible diameter. 

Arcadia sat cross-legged in the good chair. She was wearing a pair of slacks and a 
none-too-roomy shirt that belonged to Homir. Her own more feminine wardrobe had been 
washed and ironed for the landing. 

She said, "I'm going to write historical novels, you know." She was quite happy about the trip. 
Uncle Homir didn't the least mind listening to her and it made conversation so much more 
pleasant when you could talk to a really intelligent person who was serious about what you 
said. 

She continued: "I've read books and books about all the great men of Foundation history. You 
know, like Seldon, Hardin, Mallow, Devers and all the rest. I've even read most of what you've 
written about the Mule, except that it isn't much fun to read those parts where the Foundation 
loses. Wouldn't you rather read a history where they skipped the silly, tragic parts?" 

"Yes, I would," Munn assured her, gravely. "But it wouldn't be a fair history, would it, Arkady? 
You'd never get academic respect, unless you give the whole story." 

"Oh, poof. Who cares about academic respect?" She found him delightful. He hadn't missed 
calling her Arkady for days. "My novels are going to be interesting and are going to sell and be 
famous. What's the use of writing books unless you sell them and become well-known? I don't 
want just some old professors to know me. It's got to be everybody." 

Her eyes darkened with pleasure at the thought and she wriggled into a more comfortable 
position. "In fact, as soon as I can get father to let me, I'm going to visit Trantor, so's I can get 
background material on the First Empire, you know. I was born on Trantor; did you know that?" 

He did, but he said, "You were?" and put just the right amount of amazement into his voice. He 
was rewarded with something between a beam and a simper. 

"Uh-huh. My grandmother ... you know, Bayta Darell, you've heard of her ... was on Trantor 
once with my grandfather. In fact, that's where they stopped the Mule, when all the Galaxy was 
at his feet; and my father and mother went there also when they were first married. I was born 
there. I even lived there till mother died, only I was just three then, and I don't remember much 
about it. Were you ever on Trantor, Uncle Homir?" 

"No, can't say I was." He leaned back against the cold bulkhead and listened idly. Kalgan was 
very close, and he felt his uneasiness flooding back. 

"Isn't it just the most romantic world? My father says that under Stannel V, it had more people 
than any ten worlds nowadays. He says it was just one big world of metals - one big city - that 



was the capital of all the Galaxy. He's shown me pictures that he took on Trantor. It's all in ruins 
now, but it's still stupendous. I'd just love to see it again. In fact ... Homir!" 

"Yes?" 

"Why don't we go there, when we're finished with Kalgan?" 

Some of the fright hurtled back into his face. "What? Now don't start on that. This is business, 
not pleasure. Remember that." 

"But it is business" she squeaked. "There might be incredible amounts of information on 
Trantor, don't you think so?* 

"No, I don't He scrambled to his feet "Now untangle yourself from the computer. We've got to 
make the last jump, and then you turn in." One good thing about landing, anyway; he was about 
fed up with trying to sleep on an overcoat on the metal floor. 

The calculations were not difficult. The "Space Route Handbook" was quite explicit on the 
Foundation-Kalgan route. There was the momentary twitch of the timeless passage through 
hyperspace and the final light-year dropped away. 

The sun of Kalgan was a sun now - large, bright, and yellow-white; invisible behind the 
portholes that had automatically closed on the sun-lit side. 

Kalgan was only a night's sleep away. 


12 

Lord 

Of all the worlds of the Galaxy, Kalgan undoubtedly had the most unique history. That of the 
planet Terminus, for instance, was that of an almost uninterrupted rise. That of Trantor, once 
capital of the Galaxy, was that of an almost uninterrupted fall. But Kalgan- 

Kalgan first gained fame as the pleasure world of the Galaxy two centuries before the birth of 
Hari Seldon. It was a pleasure world in the sense that it made an industry - and an immensely 
profitable one, at that - out of amusement. 

And it was a stable industry. It was the most stable industry in the Galaxy. When all the Galaxy 
perished as a civilization, little by little, scarcely a feather's weight of catastrophe fell upon 
Kalgan. No matter how the economy and sociology of the neighboring sectors of the Galaxy 
changed, there was always an elite; and it is always the characteristic of an elite that it 
possesses leisure as the great reward of its elite-hood. 

Kalgan was at the service, therefore, successively - and successfully - of the effete and 
perfumed dandies of the Imperial Court with their sparkling and libidinous ladies; of the rough 
and raucous warlords who ruled in iron the worlds they had gained in blood, with their unbridled 
and lascivious wenches; of the plump and luxurious businessmen of the Foundation, with their 
lush and flagitious mistresses. 



It was quite undiscriminating, since they all had money. And since Kalgan serviced all and 
barred none; since its commodity was in unfailing demand; since it had the wisdom to interfere 
in no world's politics, to stand on no one's legitimacy, it prospered when nothing else did, and 
remained fat when all grew thin. 

That is, until the Mule. Then, somehow, it fell, too, before a conqueror who was impervious to 
amusement, or to anything but conquest. To him all planets were alike, even Kalgan. 

So for a decade, Kalgan found itself in the strange role of Galactic metropolis; mistress of the 
greatest Empire since the end of the Galactic Empire itself. 

And then, with the death of the Mule, as sudden as the zoom, came the drop. The Foundation 
broke away. With it and after it, much of the rest of the Mule's dominions. Fifty years later there 
was left only the bewildering memory of that short space of power, like an opium dream. Kalgan 
never quite recovered. It could never return to the unconcerned pleasure world it had been, for 
the spell of power never quite releases its bold. It lived instead under a succession of men 
whom the Foundation called the Lords of Kalgan, but who styled themselves First Citizen of the 
Galaxy, in imitation of the Mule's only title, and who maintained the fiction that they were 
conquerors too. 

The current Lord of Kalgan had held that position for five months. Fie had gained it originally by 
virtue of his position at the head of the Kalganian navy, and through a lamentable lack of 
caution on the part of the previous lord. Yet no one on Kalgan was quite stupid enough to go 
into the question of legitimacy too long or too closely. These things happened, and are best 
accepted. 

Yet that sort of survival of the fittest in addition to putting a premium on bloodiness and evil, 
occasionally allowed capability to come to the fore as well. Lord Stettin was competent enough 
and not easy to manage. 

Not easy for his eminence, the First Minister, who, with fine impartiality, had served the last lord 
as well as the present; and who would, if he lived long enough, serve the next as honestly. 

Nor easy for the Lady Callia, who was Stettin's more than friend, yet less than wife. 

In Lord Stettin's private apartments the three were alone that evening. The First Citizen, bulky 
and glistening in the admiral's uniform that he affected, scowled from out the unupholstered 
chair in which he sat as stiffly as the plastic of which it was composed. His First Minister Lev 
Meirus, faced him with a far-off unconcern, his long, nervous fingers stroking absently and 
rhythmically the deep line that curved from hooked nose along gaunt and sunken cheek to the 
point, nearly, of the gray-bearded chin. The Lady Callia disposed of herself gracefully on the 
deeply furred covering of a foamite couch, her full lips trembling a bit in an unheeded pout. 

"Sir," said Meirus - it was the only title adhering to a lord who was styled only First Citizen, "you 
lack a certain view of the continuity of history. Your own life, with its tremendous revolutions, 
leads you to think of the course of civilization as something equally amenable to sudden 
change. But it is not." 


The Mule showed otherwise. 



"But who can follow in his footsteps. He was more than man, remember. And be, too, was not 
entirely successful." 

"Poochie," whimpered the Lady Callia, suddenly, and then shrank into herself at the furious 
gesture from the First Citizen. 

Lord Stettin said, harshly, "Do not interrupt, Callia. Meirus, I am tired of inaction. My 
predecessor spent his life polishing the navy into a finely-turned instrument that has not its 
equal in the Galaxy. And he died with the magnificent machine lying idle. Am I to continue that? 
I, an Admiral of the Navy? 

"How long before the machine rusts? At present, it is a drain on the Treasury and returns 
nothing. Its officers long for dominion, its men for loot. All Kalgan desires the return of Empire 
and glory. Are you capable of understanding that?" 

"These are but words that you use, but I grasp your meaning. Dominion, loot, glory - pleasant 
when they are obtained, but the process of obtaining them is often risky and always 
unpleasant. The first fine flush may not last. And in all history, it has never been wise to attack 
the Foundation. Even the Mule would have been wiser to refrain-" 

There were tears in the Lady Callia's blue, empty eyes. Of late, Poochie scarcely saw her, and 
now, when he had promised the evening to her, this horrible, thin, gray man, who always 
looked through her rather than at her, had forced his way in. And Poochie let him. She dared 
not say anything; was frightened even of the sob that forced its way out. 

But Stettin was speaking now in the voice she hated, hard and Impatient. He was saying: 
"You're a slave to the far past. The Foundation is greater in volume and population, but they 
are loosely knit and will fall apart at a blow. What holds them together these days is merely 
inertia; an inertia I am strong enough to smash. You are hypnotized by the old days when only 
the Foundation had atomic power. They were able to dodge the last hammer blows of the dying 
Empire and then faced only the unbrained anarchy of the warlords who would counter the 
Foundation's atomic vessels only with hulks and relics. 

"But the Mule, my dear Meirus, has changed that. He spread the knowledge, that the 
Foundation had hoarded to itself, through half the Galaxy and the monopoly in science is gone 
forever. We can match them." 

"And the Second Foundation?" questioned Meirus, coolly. 

"And the Second Foundation?" repeated Stettin as coolly. "Do you know its intentions? It took 
ten years to stop the Mule, if, indeed, it was the factor, which some doubt. Are you unaware 
that a good many of the Foundation's psychologists and sociologists are of the opinion that the 
Seldon Plan has been completely disrupted since the days of the Mule? If the Plan has gone, 
then a vacuum exists which I may fill as well as the next man." 

"Our knowledge of these matters is not great enough to warrant the gamble." 

"Our knowledge, perhaps, but we have a Foundation visitor on the planet. Did you know that? A 
Homir Munn - who, I understand, has written articles on the Mule, and has expressed exactly 



that opinion, that the Seldon Plan no longer exists." 

The First Minister nodded, "I have heard of him, or at least of his writings. What does he 
desire?" 

"He asks permission to enter the Mule's palace." 

"Indeed? It would be wise to refuse. It is never advisable to disturb the superstitions with which 
a planet is held." 

"I will consider that - and we will speak again." 

Meirus bowed himself out. 

Lady Callia said tearfully, "Are you angry with me, Poochie?" Stettin turned on her savagely. 
"Have I not told you before never to call me by that ridiculous name in the presence of others?" 

"You used to like it." 

"Well, I don't any more, and it is not to happen again." 

He stared at her darkly. It was a mystery to him that he tolerated her these days. She was a 
soft, empty-headed thing, comfortable to the touch, with a pliable affection that was a 
convenient facet to a hard life. Yet, even that affection was becoming wearisome. She dreamed 
of marriage, of being First Lady. 

Ridiculous! 

She was all very well when he had been an admiral only - but now as First Citizen and future 
conqueror, he needed more. He needed heirs who could unite his future dominions, something 
the Mule had never had, which was why his Empire did not survive his strange nonhuman life. 
He, Stettin, needed someone of the great historic families of the Foundation with whom he 
could fuse dynasties. 

He wondered testily why he did not rid himself of Callia now. It would be no trouble. She would 
whine a bit- He dismissed the thought. She had her points, occasionally. 

Callia was cheering up now. The influence of Graybeard was gone and her Poochie's granite 
face was softening now. She lifted herself in a single, fluid motion and melted toward him. 

"You're not going to scold me, are you?" 

"No." He patted her absently. "Now just sit quietly for a while, will you? I want to think." 

"About the man from the Foundation?" 

"Yes." 

"Poochie?" This was a pause. 

"What?" 

"Poochie, the man has a little girl with him, you said. Remember? Could I see her when she 



comes? I never-' 


"Now what do you think I want him to bring his brat with him for? Is my audience room to be a 
grammar school? Enough of your nonsense, Callia." 

"But I’ll take care of her, Poochie. You won't even have to bother with her. It's just that I hardly 
ever see children, and you know how I love them." 

He looked at her sardonically. She never tired of this approach. She loved children; i.e. his 
children; i.e. his legitimate children; i.e. marriage. He laughed. 

"This particular little piece," he said, "is a great girl of fourteen or fifteen. She's probably as tall 
as you are." 

Callia looked crushed. "Well, could I, anyway? She could tell me about the Foundation? I've 
always wanted to go there, you know. My grandfather was a Foundation man. Won't you take 
me there, sometime, Poochie?" 

Stettin smiled at the thought. Perhaps he would, as conqueror. The good nature that the 
thought supplied him with made itself felt in his words, "I will, I will. And you can see the girl and 
talk Foundation to her all you want. But not near me, understand." 

"I won't bother you, honestly. I'll have her in my own rooms." She was happy again. It was not 
very often these days that she was allowed to have her way. She put her arms about his neck 
and after the slightest hesitation, she felt its tendons relax and the large head come softly down 
upon her shoulder. 


13 

Lady 

Arcadia felt triumphant. How life had changed since Pelleas Anthor had stuck his silly face up 
against her window - and all because she had the vision and courage to do what needed to be 
done. 

Here she was on Kalgan. She had been to the great Central Theater - the largest in the Galaxy 
- and seen in person some of the singing stars who were famous even in the distant 
Foundation. She had shopped all on her own along the Flowered Path, fashion center of the 
gayest world in Space. And she had made her own selections because Homir just didn't know 
anything about it at all. The saleswomen raised no objections at all to long, shiny dresses with 
those vertical sweeps that made her look so tall - and Foundation money went a long, long 
way. Homir had given her a ten-credit bill and when she changed it to Kalganian "Kalganids," it 
made a terribly thick sheaf. 

She had even had her hair redone - sort of half-short in back, with two glistening curls over 
each temple. And it was treated so that it looked goldier than ever; it just shone. 

But this, this was best of all. To be sure, the Palace of Lord Stettin wasn't as grand and lavish 



as the theaters, or as mysterious and historical as the old palace of the Mule - of which, so far 
they had only glimpsed the lonely towers in their air flight across the planet - but, imagine, a 
real Lord. She was rapt in the glory of it. 

And not only that. She was actually face to face with his Mistress. Arcadia capitalized the word 
in her mind, because she knew the role such women had played in history; knew their glamour 
and power. In fact, she had often thought of being an all-powerful and glittering creature, 
herself, but somehow mistresses weren't in fashion at the Foundation just then and besides, 
her father probably wouldn't let her, if it came to that. 

Of course, the Lady Callia didn't quite come up to Arcadia's notion of the part. For one thing, 
she was rather plump, and didn't look at all wicked and dangerous, just sort of faded and 
near-sighted. Her voice was high, too, instead of throaty, and- 

Callia said, "Would you like more tea, child?" 

"I'll have another cup, thank you, your grace," - or was it your highness? 

Arcadia continued with a connoisseur's condescension, "Those are lovely pearls you are 
wearing, my lady." (On the whole, "my lady" seemed best.) 

"Oh? Do you think so?" Callia seemed vaguely pleased. She removed them and let them swing 
milkily to and fro. "Would you like them? You can have them, if you like." 

"Oh, my- You really mean-" She found them in her hand, then, repelling them mournfully, she 
said, "Father wouldn't like it." 

"Fie wouldn't like the pearls? But they're quite nice pearls." 

"Fie wouldn't like my taking them, I mean. You're not supposed to take expensive presents from 
other people, he says." 

"You aren't? But ... I mean, this was a present to me from Poo ... from the First Citizen. Was 
that wrong, do you suppose?" 

Arcadia reddened. "I didn't mean-" 

But Callia had tired of the subject. She let the pearls slide to the ground and said, "You were 
going to tell me about the Foundation. Please do so right now." 

And Arcadia was suddenly at a loss. What does one say about a world dull to tears. To her, the 
Foundation was a suburban town, a comfortable house, the annoying necessities of education, 
the uninteresting eternities of a quiet life. She said, uncertainly, "It's just like you view in the 
book-films, I suppose." 

"Oh, do you view book-films? They give me such a headache when I try. But do you know I 
always love video stories about your Traders - such big, savage men. It's always so exciting. Is 
your friend, Mr. Munn, one of them? Fie doesn't seem nearly savage enough. Most of the 
Traders had beards and big bass voices, and were so domineering with women - don't you 
think so?" 



Arcadia smiled, glassily. "That's just part of history, my lady. I mean, when the Foundation was 
Young, the Traders were the pioneers pushing back the frontiers and bringing civilization to the 
rest of the Galaxy. We learned all about that in school. But that time has passed. We don't have 
Traders any more; just corporations and things." 

"Really? What a shame. Then what does Mr. Munn do? I mean, if he's not a Trader." 

"Uncle Homir's a librarian." 

Callia put a hand to her lips and tittered. "You mean he takes care of book-films. Oh, my! It 
seems like such a silly thing for a grown man to do." 

"He's a very good librarian, my lady. It is an occupation that is very highly regarded at the 
Foundation." She put down the little, iridescent teacup upon the milky-metaled table surface. 

Her hostess was all concern. "But my dear child. I'm sure I didn't mean to offend you. He must 
be a very intelligent man. I could see it in his eyes as soon as I looked at him. They were so ... 
so intelligent. And he must be brave, too, to want to see the Mule's palace." 

"Brave?" Arcadia's internal awareness twitched. This was what she was waiting for. Intrigue! 
Intrigue! With great indifference, she asked, staring idly at her thumbtip: "Why must one be 
brave to wish to see the Mule's palace?" 

"Didn't you know?" Her eyes were round, and her voice sank. "There's a curse on it. When he 
died, the Mule directed that no one ever enter it until the Empire of the Galaxy is established. 
Nobody on Kalgan would dare even to enter the grounds." 

Arcadia absorbed that. "But that's superstition-" 

"Don't say that," Callia was distressed. "Poochie always says that. He says it's useful to say it 
isn't though, in order to maintain his hold over the people. But I notice he's never gone in 
himself. And neither did Thallos, who was First Citizen before Poochie." A thought struck her 
and she was all curiosity again: "But why does Mr. Munn want to see the Palace?" 

And it was here that Arcadia's careful plan could be put into action. She knew well from the 
books she had read that a ruler's mistress was the real power behind the throne, that she was 
the very well-spring of influence. Therefore, if Uncle Homir failed with Lord Stettin - and she 