was sure he would - she must retrieve that failure with Lady Callia. To be sure, Lady Callia was 
something of a puzzle. She didn't seem at all bright. But, well, all history proved- 

She said, "There's a reason, my lady - but will you keep it in confidence?" 

"Cross my heart," said Callia, making the appropriate gesture on the soft, billowing whiteness of 
her breast. 

Arcadia's thoughts kept a sentence ahead of her words. "Uncle Homir is a great authority on 
the Mule, you know. He's written books and books about it, and he thinks that all of Galactic 
history has been changed since the Mule conquered the Foundation." 

"Oh, my." 



He thinks the Seldon Plan-' 


Callia clapped her hands. "I know about the Seldon Plan. The videos about the Traders were 
always all about the Seldon Plan. It was supposed to arrange to have the Foundation win all 
the time. Science had something to do with it, though I could never quite see how. I always get 
so restless when I have to listen to explanations. But you go right ahead, my dear. It's different 
when you explain. You make everything seem so clear." 

Arcadia continued, "Well, don't you see then that when the Foundation was defeated by the 
Mule, the Seldon Plan didn't work and it hasn't worked since. So who will form the Second 
Empire?" 

"The Second Empire?" 

"Yes, one must be formed some day, but how? That's the problem, you see. And there's the 
Second Foundation." 

"The Second Foundation?" She was quite completely lost. 

'Yes, they're the planners of history that are following in the footsteps of Seldon. They stopped 
the Mule because he was premature, but now, they may be supporting Kalgan." 

"Why?" 

"Because Kalgan may now offer the best chance of being the nucleus for a new Empire." 

Dimly, Lady Callia seemed to grasp that. "You mean Poochie is going to make a new Empire." 

"We can't tell for sure. Uncle Homir thinks so, but hell have to see the Mule's records to find 
out." 

"It's all very complicated," said Lady Callia, doubtfully. 

Arcadia gave up. She had done her best. 

Lord Stettin was in a more-or-less savage humor. The session with the milksop from the 
Foundation had been quite unrewarding. It had been worse; it had been embarrassing. To be 
absolute ruler of twenty-seven worlds, master of the Galaxy's greatest military machine, owner 
of the universe's most vaulting ambition - and left to argue nonsense with an antiquarian. 

Damnation! 

He was to violate the customs of Kalgan, was he? To allow the Mule's palace to be ransacked 
so that a fool could write another book? The cause of science! The sacredness of knowledge! 
Great Galaxy! Were these catchwords to be thrown in his face in all seriousness? Besides - 
and his flesh prickled slightly - there was the matter of the curse. He didn't believe in it; no 
intelligent man could. But if he was going to defy it, it would have to be for a better reason than 
any the fool had advanced. 

"What do you want?" he snapped, and Lady Callia cringed visibly in the doorway. 

"Are you busy?" 



"Yes. I am busy." 

"But there's nobody here, Poochie. Couldn't I even speak to you for a minute?" 

"Oh, Galaxy! What do you want? Now hurry." 

Her words stumbled. "The little girl told me they were going into the Mule's palace. I thought we 
could go with her. It must be gorgeous inside." 

"She told you that, did she? Well, she isn't and we aren't. Now go tend your own business. I've 
had about enough of you." 

"But, Poochie, why not? Aren't you going to let them? The little girl said that you were going to 
make an Empire!" 

"I don't care what she said- What was that?" He strode to Callia, and caught her firmly above 
the elbow, so that his fingers sank deeply into the soft flesh, "What did she tell you?" 

"You're hurting me. I can't remember what she said, if you're going to look at me like that." 

He released her, and she stood there for a moment, rubbing vainly at the red marks. She 
whimpered, "The little girl made me promise not to tell." 

"That's too bad. Tell me! Now!" 

"Well, she said the Seldon Plan was changed and that there was another Foundation 
somewheres that was arranging to have you make an Empire. That's all. She said Mr. Munn 
was a very important scientist and that the Mule's palace would have proof of all that. That's 
every bit of what she said. Are you angry?" 

But Stettin did not answer. He left the room, hurriedly, with Callia's cowlike eyes staring 
mournfully after him. Two orders were sent out over the official seal of the First Citizen before 
the hour was up. One had the effect of sending five hundred ships of the line into space on 
what were officially to be termed as "war games." The other had the effect of throwing a single 
man into confusion. 

Homir Munn ceased his preparations to leave when that second order reached him. It was, of 
course, official permission to enter the palace of the Mule. He read and reread it with anything 
but joy. 

But Arcadia was delighted. She knew what had happened. 

Or, at any rate, she thought she did. 


14 



Anxiety 

Poli placed the breakfast on the table, keeping one eye on the table news-recorder which 
quietly disgorged the bulletins of the day. It could be done easily enough without loss of 
efficiency, this one-eye-absent business. Since all items of food were sterilely packed in 
containers which served as discardable cooking units, her duties vis-a-vis breakfast consisted 
of nothing more than choosing the menu, placing the items on the table, and removing the 
residue thereafter. 

She clacked her tongue at what she saw and moaned softly in retrospect. 

"Oh, people are so wicked," she said, and Darell merely hemmed in reply. 

Her voice took on the high-pitched rasp which she automatically assumed when about to bewail 
the evil of the world. "Now why do these terrible Kalganese" - she accented the second 
syllable and gave it a long "a" - "do like that? You'd think they'd give a body peace. But no, it's 
just trouble, trouble, all the time. 

"Now look at that headline: 'Mobs Riot Before Foundation Consulate.’ Oh, would I like to give 
them a piece of my mind, if I could. That's the trouble with people; they just don't remember. 
They just don't remember, Dr. Darell - got no memory at all. Look at the last war after the Mule 
died - of course I was just a little girl then - and oh, the fuss and trouble. My own uncle was 
killed, him being just in his twenties and only two years married, with a baby girl. I remember 
him even yet - blond hair he had, and a dimple in his chin. I have a trimensional cube of him 
somewheres- 

"And now his baby girl has a son of her own in the navy and most like if anything happens- 

"And we had the bombardment patrols, and all the old men taking turns in the stratospheric 
defense - I could imagine what they would have been able to do if the Kalganese had come 
that far. My mother used to tell us children about the food rationing and the prices and taxes. A 
body could hardly make ends meet- 

"You'd think if they had sense people would just never want to start it again; just have nothing 
to do with it. And I suppose it's not people that do it, either; I suppose even Kalganese would 
rather sit at home with their families and not go fooling around in ships and getting killed. It's 
that awful man, Stettin. It's a wonder people like that are let live. He kills the old man - what's 
his name - Thallos, and now he's just spoiling to be boss of everything. 

"And why he wants to fight us, I don't know. He's bound to lose - like they always do. Maybe it's 
all in the Plan, but sometimes I'm sure it must be a wicked plan to have so much fighting and 
killing in it, though to be sure I haven't a word to say about Hari Seldon, who I'm sure knows 
much more about that than I do and perhaps I'm a fool to question him. And the other 
Foundation is as much to blame. They could stop Kalgan now and make everything fine. They'll 
do it anyway in the end, and you'd think they'd do it before there's any damage done." 

Dr. Darell looked up. "Did you say something, Poli?" 

Poli's eyes opened wide, then narrowed angrily. "Nothing, doctor, nothing at all. I haven't got a 



word to say. A body could as soon choke to death as say a word in this house. It's jump here, 
and jump there, but just try to say a word-" and she went off simmering. 

Her leaving made as little impression on Darell as did her speaking. 

Kalgan! Nonsense! A merely physical enemy! Those had always been beaten! 

Yet he could not divorce himself of the current foolish crisis. Seven days earlier, the mayor had 
asked him to be Administrator of Research and Development. He had promised an answer 
today. 

Well- 

He stirred uneasily. Why, himself! Yet could he refuse? It would seem strange, and he dared 
not seem strange. After all, what did he care about Kalgan. To him there was only one enemy. 
Always had been. 

While his wife had lived, he was only too glad to shirk the task; to hide. Those long, quiet days 
on Trantor, with the ruins of the past about them! The silence of a wrecked world and the 
forgetfulness of it all! 

But she had died. Less than five years, all told, it had been; and after that he knew that he 
could live only by fighting that vague and fearful enemy that deprived him of the dignity of 
manhood by controlling his destiny; that made life a miserable struggle against a foreordained 
end; that made all the universe a hateful and deadly chess game. 

Call it sublimation; he, himself did can it that - but the fight gave meaning to his life. 

First to the University of Santanni, where he had joined Dr. Kleise. It had been five years 
well-spent. 

And yet Kleise was merely a gatherer of data. He could not succeed in the real task - and 
when Darell had felt that as certainty, he knew it was time to leave. 

Kleise may have worked in secret, yet he had to have men working for him and with him. He 
had subjects whose brains he probed. He had a University that backed him. All these were 
weaknesses. 

Kleise could not understand that; and he, Darell, could not explain that. They parted enemies. It 
was well; they had to. He had to leave in surrender - in case someone watched. 

Where Kleise worked with charts; Darell worked with mathematical concepts in the recesses of 
his mind. Kleise worked with many; Darell with none. Kleise in a University; Darell in the quiet 
of a suburban house. 

And he was almost there. 

A Second Foundationer is not human as far as his cerebrum is concerned. The cleverest 
physiologist, the most subtle neurochemist might detect nothing - yet the difference must be 
there. 



And since the difference was one of the mind, it was there that it must be detectable. 


Given a man like the Mule - and there was no doubt that the Second Foundationers had the 
Mule's powers, whether inborn or acquired - with the power of detecting and controlling human 
emotions, deduce from that the electronic circuit required, and deduce from that the last details 
of the encephalograph on which it could not help but be betrayed. 

And now Kleise had returned into his life, in the person of his ardent young pupil, Anthor. 

Folly! Folly! With his graphs and charts of people who had been tampered with. Fie had learned 
to detect that years ago, but of what use was it. Fie wanted the arm; not the tool. Yet he had to 
agree to join Anthor, since it was the quieter course. 

Just as now he would become Administrator of Research and Development. It was the quieter 
course! And so he remained a conspiracy within a conspiracy. 

The thought of Arcadia teased him for a moment, and he shuddered away from it. Left to 
himself, it would never have happened. Left to himself, no one would ever have been 
endangered but himself. Left to himself- 

Fle felt the anger rising-against the dead Kleise, the living Anthor, all the well-meaning fools- 
Well, she could take care of herself. She was a very mature little girl. 

She could take care of herself! 

It was a whisper in his mind- 
Yet could she? 

At the moment, that Dr. Darell told himself mournfully that she could, she was sitting in the 
coldly austere anteroom of the Executive Offices of the First Citizen of the Galaxy. For half an 
hour she had been sitting there, her eyes sliding slowly about the walls. There had been two 
armed guards at the door when she had entered with Flomir Munn. They hadn't been there the 
other times. 

She was alone, now, yet she sensed the unfriendliness of the very furnishings of the room. And 
for the first time. 

Now, why should that be? 

Flomir was with Lord Stettin. Well, was that wrong? 

It made her furious. In similar situations in the book-films and the videos, the hero foresaw the 
conclusion, was prepared for it when it came, and she - she just sat there. Anything could 
happen. Anything! And she just sat there. 

Well, back again. Think it back. Maybe something would come. 

For two weeks, Flomir had nearly lived inside the Mule's palace. Fie had taken her once, with 
Stettin's permission. It was large and gloomily massive, shrinking from the touch of life to lie 
sleeping within its ringing memories, answering the footsteps with a hollow boom or a savage 



clatter. She hadn't liked it. 


Better the great, gay highways of the capital city; the theaters and spectacles of a world 
essentially poorer than the Foundation, yet spending more of its wealth on display. 

Homir would return in the evening, awed- 

"It's a dream-world for me," he would whisper. "If I could only chip the palace down stone by 
stone, layer by layer of the aluminum sponge. If I could carry it back to Terminus- What a 
museum it would make." 

He seemed to have lost that early reluctance. He was eager, instead; glowing. Arcadia knew 
that by the one sure sign; he practically never stuttered throughout that period. 

One time, he said, "There are abstracts of the records of General Pritcher-" 

"I know him. He was the Foundation renegade, who combed the Galaxy for the Second 
Foundation, wasn't he?" 

"Not exactly a renegade, Arkady. The Mule had Converted him." 

"Oh, it's the same thing." 

"Galaxy, that combing you speak of was a hopeless task. The original records of the Seldon 
Convention that established both Foundations five hundred years ago, make only one 
reference to the Second Foundation. They say if's located 'at the other end of the Galaxy at 
Star's End.' That's all the Mule and Pritcher had to go on. They had no method of recognizing 
the Second Foundation even if they found it. What madness! 

"They have records" - he was speaking to himself, but Arcadia listened eagerly - "which must 
cover nearly a thousand worlds, yet the number of worlds available for study must have been 
closer to a million. And we are no better off-" 

Arcadia broke in anxiously, "Shhh-h" \n a tight hiss. 

Homir froze, and slowly recovered. "Let's not talk," he mumbled. 

And now Homir was with Lord Stettin and Arcadia waited outside alone and felt the blood 
squeezing out of her heart for no reason at all. That was more frightening than anything else. 
That there seemed no reason. 

On the other side of the door, Homir, too, was living in a sea of gelatin. He was fighting, with 
furious intensity, to keep from stuttering and, of course, could scarcely speak two consecutive 
words clearly as a result. 

Lord Stettin was in full uniform, six-feet-six, large-jawed, and hard-mouthed. His balled, 
arrogant fists kept a powerful time to his sentences. 

"Well, you have had two weeks, and you come to me with tales of nothing. Come, sir, tell me 
the worst. Is my Navy to be cut to ribbons? Am I to fight the ghosts of the Second Foundation 
as well as the men of the First?" 



"I ... I repeat, my lord, I am no p ... pre ... predictor. I ... I am at a complete ... loss." 

"Or do you wish to go back to warn your countrymen? To deep Space with your play-acting. I 
want the truth or I’ll have it out of you along with half your guts." 

"I'm t ... telling only the truth, and I'll have you re ... remember, my I ... lord, that I am a citizen of 
the Foundation. Y ... you cannot touch me without harvesting m ... m ... more than you count 
on." 

The Lord of Kalgan laughed uproariously. "A threat to frighten children. A horror with which to 
beat back an idiot. Come, Mr. Munn, I have been patient with you. I have listened to you for 
twenty minutes while you detailed wearisome nonsense to me which must have cost you 
sleepless nights to compose. It was wasted effort. I know you are here not merely to rake 
through the Mule's dead ashes and to warm over the cinders you findyou come here for more 
than you have admitted. Is that not true?" 

Homir Munn could no more have quenched the burning horror that grew in his eyes than, at 
that moment, he could have breathed. Lord Stettin saw that, and clapped the Foundation man 
upon his shoulder so that he and the chair he sat on reeled under the impact. 

"Good. Now let us be frank. You are investigating the Seldon Plan. You know that it no longer 
holds. You know, perhaps, that I am the inevitable winner now; I and my heirs. Well, man, what 
matters it who established the Second Empire, so long as it is established. History plays no 
favorites, eh? Are you afraid to tell me? You see that I know your mission." 

Munn said thickly, "What is it y ... you w ... want?" 

"Your presence. I would not wish the Plan spoiled through overconfidence. You understand 
more of these things than I do; you can detect small flaws that I might miss. Come, you will be 
rewarded in the end; you will have your fair glut of the loot. What can you expect at the 
Foundation? To turn the tide of a perhaps inevitable defeat? To lengthen the war? Or is it 
merely a patriotic desire to die for your country?" 

"I ... I-" He finally spluttered into silence. Not a word would come. 

"You will stay," said the Lord of Kalgan, confidently. "You have no choice. Wait" - an almost 
forgotten afterthought - "I have information to the effect that your niece is of the family of Bayta 
Darell." 

Homir uttered a startled: "Yes." He could not trust himself at this point to be capable of weaving 
anything but cold truth. 

"It is a family of note on the Foundation?" 

Homir nodded, "To whom they would certainly b ... brook no harm." 

"Harm! Don't be a fool, man; I am meditating the reverse. How old is she?" 

"Fourteen." 

"Sol Well, not even the Second Foundation, or Hari Seldon, himself, could stop time from 



passing or girls from becoming women." 

With that, he turned on his heel and strode to a draped door which he threw open violently. 

He thundered, "What in Space have you dragged your shivering carcass here for?" 

The Lady Callia blinked at him, and said in a small voice, "I didn't know anyone was with you." 
"Well, there is. I'll speak to you later of this, but now I want to see your back, and quickly." 

Her footsteps were a fading scurry in the corridor. 

Stettin returned, "She is a remnant of an interlude that has lasted too long. It will end soon. 
Fourteen, you say?" 

Homir stared at him with a brand-new horror! 

Arcadia started at the noiseless opening of a door - jumping at the jangling sliver of movement 
it made in the comer of her eye. The finger that crooked frantically at her met no response for 
long moments, and then, as if in response to the cautions enforced by the very sight of that 
white, trembling figure, she tiptoed her way across the floor. 

Their footsteps were a taut whisper in the corridor. It was the Lady Callia, of course, who held 
her hand so tightly that it hurt, and for some reason, she did not mind following her. Of the Lady 
Callia, at least, she was not afraid. 

Now, why was that? 

They were in a boudoir now, all pink fluff and spun sugar. Lady Callia stood with her back 
against the door. 

She said, "This was our private way to me ... to my room, you know, from his office. His, you 
know." And she pointed with a thumb, as though even the thought of him were grinding her soul 
to death with fear. 

"It's so lucky ... it’s so lucky-" Her pupils had blackened out the blue with their size. 

"Can you tell me-" began Arcadia timidly. 

And Callia was in frantic motion. "No, child, no. There is no time. Take off your clothes. Please. 
Please. I'll get you more, and they won't recognize you." 

She was in the closet, throwing useless bits of flummery in reckless heaps upon the ground, 
looking madly for something a girl could wear without becoming a living invitation to dalliance. 

"Here, this will do. It will have to. Do you have money? Here, take it all - and this." She was 
stripping her ears and fingers. "Just go home - go home to your Foundation." 

"But Homir ... my uncle." She protested vainly through the muffling folds of the sweet-smelling 
and luxurious spun-metal being forced over her head. 

"He won't leave. Poochie will hold him forever, but you mustn't stay. Oh, dear, don't you 
understand?" 



No." Arcadia forced a standstill, "I don't understand. 


Lady Callia squeezed her hands tightly together. "You must go back to warn your people there 
will be war. Isn't that clear?" Absolute terror seemed paradoxically to have lent a lucidity to her 
thoughts and words that was entirely out of character. "Now come!" 

Out another way! Past officials who stared after them, but saw no reason to stop one whom 
only the Lord of Kalgan could stop with impunity. Guards clicked heels and presented arms 
when they went through doors. 

Arcadia breathed only on occasion through the years the trip seemed to take - yet from the first 
crooking of the white finger to the time she stood at the outer gate, with people and noise and 
traffic in the distance was only twenty-five minutes. 

She looked back, with a sudden frightened pity. "I ... I ... don't know why you're doing this, my 
lady, but thanks- What's going to happen to Uncle Homir?" 

"I don't know," wailed the other. "Can't you leave? Go straight to the spaceport. Don't wait. He 
may be looking for you this very minute." 

And still Arcadia lingered. She would be leaving Homir; and, belatedly, now that she felt the 
free air about her, she was suspicious. "But what do you care if he does?" 

Lady Callia bit her lower lip and muttered, "I can't explain to a little girl like you. It would be 
improper. Well, you'll be growing up and I ... I met Poochie when I was sixteen. I can't have you 
about, you know." There was a half-ashamed hostility in her eyes. 

The implications froze Arcadia. She whispered: "What will he do to you when he finds out?" 

And she whimpered back: "I don't know," and threw her arm to her head as she left at a 
half-run, back along the wide way to the mansion of the Lord of Kalgan. 

But for one eternal second, Arcadia sf/7/ did not move, for in that last moment before Lady Callia 
left, Arcadia had seen something. Those frightened, frantic eyes had momentarily - flashingly - 
lit up with a cold amusement. 

Avast, inhuman amusement. 

It was much to see in such a quick flicker of a pair of eyes, but Arcadia had no doubt of what 
she saw. 

She was running now - running wildly - searching madly for an unoccupied public booth at 
which one could press a button for public conveyance. 

She was not running from Lord Stettin; not from him or from all the human hounds he could 
place at her heels - not from all his twenty-seven worlds rolled into a single gigantic 
phenomenon, hallooing at her shadow. 

She was running from a single, frail woman who had helped her escape. From a creature who 
had loaded her with money and jewels; who had risked her own life to save her. From an entity 
she knew, certainly and finally, to be a woman of the Second Foundation. 



An air-taxi came to a soft clicking halt in the cradle. The wind of its coming brushed against 
Arcadia's face and stirred at the hair beneath the softly-furred hood Callia had given her. 

"Where'll it be, lady?" 

She fought desperately to low-pitch her voice to make it not that of a child. "How many 
spaceports in the city?" 

"Two. Which one ya want?" 

"Which is closer?" 

He stared at her: "Kalgan Central, lady." 

"The other one, please. I’ve got the money." She had a twenty-Kalganid note in her hand. The 
denomination of the note made little difference to her, but the taxi-man grinned appreciatively. 

"Anything ya say, lady. Sky-line cabs take ya anywhere." 

She cooled her cheek against the slightly musty upholstery. The lights of the city moved 
leisurely below her. 

What should she do? What should she do? 

It was in that moment that she knew she was a stupid , stupid little girl, away from her father, 
and frightened. Her eyes were full of tears, and deep down in her throat, there was a small, 
soundless cry that hurt her insides. 

She wasn't afraid that Lord Stettin would catch her. Lady Callia would see to that. Lady Callia! 
Old, fat, stupid, but she held on to her lord, somehow. Oh, it was clear enough, now. Everything 
was clear. 

That tea with Callia at which she had been so smart. Clever little Arcadia! Something inside 
Arcadia choked and hated itself. That tea had been maneuvered, and then Stettin had probably 
been maneuvered so that Homir was allowed to inspect the Palace after all. She, the foolish 
Callia, has wanted it so, and arranged to have smart little Arcadia supply a foolproof excuse, 
one which would arouse no suspicions in the minds of the victims, and yet involve a minimum 
of interference on her part. 

Then why was she free? Homir was a prisoner, of course- 
Unless- 

Unless she went back to the Foundation as a decoy - a decoy to lead others into the hands of 
...of them. 

So she couldn't return to the Foundation- 

"Spaceport, lady." The air-taxi had come to a halt. Strange! She hadn't even noticed. 

What a dream-world it was. 



"Thanks," she pushed the bill at him without seeing anything and was stumbling out the door, 
then running across the springy pavement. 

Lights. Unconcerned men and women. Large gleaming bulletin boards, with the moving figures 
that followed every single spaceship that arrived and departed. 

Where was she going? She didn't care. She only knew that she wasn't going to the Foundation! 
Anywhere else at all would suit. 

Oh, thank Seldon, for that forgetful moment - that last split-second when Callia wearied of her 
act because she had to do only with a child and had let her amusement spring through. 

And then something else occurred to Arcadia, something that had been stirring and moving at 
the base of her brain ever since the flight began - something that forever killed the fourteen in 
her. 

And she knew that she must escape. 

That above all. Though they located every conspirator on the Foundation; though they caught 
her own father; she could not dared not, risk a warning. She could not risk her own life - not in 
the slightest - for the entire realm of Terminus. She was the most important person in the 
Galaxy. She was the only important person in the Galaxy. 

She knew that even as she stood before the ticket-machine and wondered where to go. 

Because in all the Galaxy, she and she alone, except for they, themselves, knew the location of 
the Second Foundation. 


15 

Through the Grid 

TRANTOR By the middle of the Interregnum, Trantor was a shadow. In the midst of the 
colossal ruins, there lived a small community of farmers.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

There is nothing, never has been anything, quite like a busy spaceport on the outskirts of a 
capital city of a populous planet. There are the huge machines resting mightily in their cradles. 
If you choose your time properly, there is the impressive sight of the sinking giant dropping to 
rest or, more hair-raising still, the swiftening departure of a bubble of steel. All processes 
involved are nearly noiseless. The motive power is the silent surge of nucleons shifting into 
more compact arrangements 

In terms of area, ninety-five percent of the port has just been referred to. Square miles are 
reserved for the machines, and for the men who serve them and for the calculators that serve 
both. 


Only five percent of the port is given over to the floods of humanity to whom it is the way station 



to all the stars of the Galaxy. It is certain that very few of the anonymous many-headed stop to 
consider the technological mesh that knits the spaceways. Perhaps some of them might itch 
occasionally at the thought of the thousands of tons represented by the sinking steel that looks 
so small off in the distance. One of those cyclopean cylinders could, conceivably, miss the 
guiding beam and crash half a mile from its expected landing point - through the glassite roof 
of the immense waiting room perhaps - so that only a thin organic vapor and some powdered 
phosphates would be left behind to mark the passing of a thousand men. 

It could never happen, however, with the safety devices in use; and only the badly neurotic 
would consider the possibility for more than a moment. 

Then what do they think about? It is not just a crowd, you see. It is a crowd with a purpose. 

That purpose hovers over the field and thickens the atmosphere. Lines queue up; parents herd 
their children; baggage is maneuvered in precise masses - people are going somewheres. 

Consider then the complete psychic isolation of a single unit of this terribly intent mob that does 
not know where to go; yet at the same time feels more intensely than any of the others possibly 
can, the necessity of going somewheres; anywhere! Or almost anywhere! 

Even lacking telepathy or any of the crudely definite methods of mind touching mind, there is a 
sufficient clash in atmosphere, in intangible mood, to suffice for despair. 

To suffice? To overflow, and drench, and drown. 

Arcadia Darell, dressed in borrowed clothes, standing on a borrowed planet in a borrowed 
situation of what seemed even to be a borrowed life, wanted earnestly the safety of the womb. 
She didn't know that was what she wanted. She only knew that the very openness of the open 
world was a great danger. She wanted a closed spot somewhere - somewhere far - 
somewhere in an unexplored nook of the universe - where no one would ever look. 

And there she was, age fourteen plus, weary enough for eighty plus, frightened enough for five 
minus. 

What stranger of the hundreds that brushed past her - actually brushed past her, so that she 
could feel their touch - was a Second Foundationer? What stranger could not help but instantly 
destroy her for her guilty knowledge - her unique knowledge - of knowing where the Second 
Foundation was? 

And the voice that cut in on her was a thunderclap that iced the scream in her throat into a 
voiceless slash. 

"Look, miss," it said, irritably, "are you using the ticket machine or are you just standing there?" 

It was the first she realized that she was standing in front of a ticket machine. You put a high 
denomination bill into the clipper which sank out of sight. You pressed the button below your 
destination and a ticket came out together with the correct change as determined by an 
electronic scanning device that never made a mistake. It was a very ordinary thing and there is 
no cause for anyone to stand before it for five minutes. 

Arcadia plunged a two-hundred credit into the clipper, and was suddenly aware of the button 



labeled "Trantor." Trantor, dead capital of the dead Empire - the planet on which she was born. 
She pressed it in a dream. Nothing happened, except that the red letters flicked on and off, 
reading 172.18- 172.18— 172.18— 

It was the amount she was short. Another two-hundred credit. The ticket was spit out towards 
her. It came loose when she touched it, and the change tumbled out afterward. 

She seized it and ran. She felt the man behind her pressing close, anxious for his own chance 
at the machine, but she twisted out from before him and did not look behind. 

Yet there was nowhere to run. They were all her enemies. 

Without quite realizing it, she was watching the gigantic, glowing signs that puffed into the air: 
Steffani, Anacreon, Fermus- There was even one that ballooned, Terminus, and she longed for 
it, but did not dare- 

For a trifling sum, she could have hired a notifier which could have been set for any destination 
she cared and which would, when placed in her purse, make itself heard only to her, fifteen 
minutes before take-off time. But such devices are for people who are reasonably secure, 
however; who can pause to think of them. 

And then, attempting to look both ways simultaneously, she ran head-on into a soft abdomen. 
She felt the startled outbreath and grunt, and a hand come down on her arm. She writhed 
desperately but lacked breath to do more than mew a bit in the back of her throat. 

Her captor held her firmly and waited. Slowly, he came into focus for her and she managed to 
look at him. He was rather plump and rather short. His hair was white and copious, being 
brushed back to give a pompadour effect that looked strangely incongruous above a round and 
ruddy face that shrieked its peasant origin. 

"What's the matter?" he said finally, with a frank and twinkling curiosity. "You look scared." 
"Sorry," muttered Arcadia in a frenzy. "I’ve got to go. Pardon me." 

But he disregarded that entirely, and said, "Watch out, little girl. You'll drop your ticket." And he 
lifted it from her resistless white fingers and looked at it with every evidence of satisfaction. 

"I thought so," he said, and then bawled in bull-like tones, "Mommuh!" 

A woman was instantly at his side, somewhat more short, somewhat more round, somewhat 
more ruddy. She wound a finger about a stray gray lock to shove it beneath a well-outmoded 
hat. 

"Pappa," she said, reprovingly, "why do you shout in a crowd like that? People look at you like 
you were crazy. Do you think you are on the farm?" 

And she smiled sunnily at the unresponsive Arcadia, and added, "He has manners like a bear." 
Then, sharply, "Pappa, let go the little girl. What are you doing?" 

But Pappa simply waved the ticket at her. "Look," he said, "she's going to Trantor." 



Mamma's face was a sudden beam, "You're from Trantor? Let go her arm, I say, Pappa." She 
turned the overstuffed valise she was carrying onto its side and forced Arcadia to sit down with 
a gentle but unrelenting pressure. "Sit down," she said, "and rest your little feet. It will be no 
ship yet for an hour and the benches are crowded with sleeping loafers. You are from Trantor?" 

Arcadia drew a deep breath and gave in. Huskily, she said, "I was born there." 

And Mamma clapped her hands gleefully, "One month we've been here and till now we met 
nobody from home. This is very nice. Your parents-" she looked about vaguely. 

"I'm not with my parents," Arcadia said, carefully. 

"All alone? A little girl like you?" Mamma was at once a blend of indignation and sympathy, 
"How does that come to be?" 

"Mamma," Pappa plucked at her sleeve, "let me tell you. There's something wrong. I think she's 
frightened." His voice, though obviously intended for a whisper was quite plainly audible to 
Arcadia. "She was running - I was watching her - and not looking where she was going. Before 
I could step out of the way, she bumped into me. And you know what? I think she's in trouble." 

"So shut your mouth, Pappa. Into you, anybody could bump." But she joined Arcadia on the 
valise, which creaked wearily under the added weight and put an arm about the girl's trembling 
shoulder. "You're running away from somebody, sweetheart? Don't be afraid to tell me. Ill help 
you." 

Arcadia looked across at the kind gray eyes of the woman and felt her lips quivering. One part 
of her brain was telling her that here were people from Trantor, with whom she could go, who 
could help her remain on that planet until she could decide what next to do, where next to go. 
And another part of her brain, much the louder, was telling her in jumbled incoherence that she 
did not remember her mother, that she was weary to death of fighting the universe, that she 
wanted only to curl into a little hall with strong, gentle arms about her, that if her mother had 
lived, she might ... she might- 

And for the first time that night, she was crying; crying like a little baby, and glad of it; clutching 
tightly at the old-fashioned dress and dampening a corner of it thoroughly, while soft arms held 
her closely and a gentle hand stroked her curls. 

Pappa stood helplessly looking at the pair, fumbling futilely for a handkerchief which, when 
produced, was snatched from his hand. Mamma glared an admonition of quietness at him. The 
crowds surged about the little group with the true indifference of disconnected crowds 
everywhere. They were effectively alone. 

Finally, the weeping trickled to a halt, and Arcadia smiled weakly as she dabbed at red eyes 
with the borrowed handkerchief. "Golly," she whispered, 

"S/7/7. S/7/7. Don't talk," said Mamma, fussily, "just sit and rest for a while. Catch your breath. 
Then tell us what's wrong, and you'll see, we'll fix it up, and everything will be all right." 

Arcadia scrabbled what remained of her wits together. She could not tell them the truth. She 
could tell nobody the truth- And yet she was too worn to invent a useful lie. 



She said, whisperingly, "I'm better, now." 

"Good," said Mamma. "Now tell me why you’re in trouble. You did nothing wrong? Of course, 
whatever you did, well help you; but tell us the truth." 

"For a friend from Trantor, anything," added Pappa, expansively, "eh, Mamma?" 

"Shut your mouth, Pappa," was the response, without rancor. 

Arcadia was groping in her purse. That, at least, was still hers, despite the rapid 
clothes-changing forced upon her in Lady Callia's apartments. She found what she was looking 
for and handed it to Mamma. 

"These are my papers," she said, diffidently. It was shiny, synthetic parchment which had been 
issued her by the Foundation's ambassador on the day of her arrival and which had been 
countersigned by the appropriate Kalganian official. It was large, florid, and impressive. 

Mamma looked at it helplessly, and passed it to Pappa who absorbed its contents with an 
impressive pursing of the lips. 

Fie said, "You're from the Foundation?" 

"Yes. But I was born in Trantor. See it says that-" 

"Ah-hah. It looks all right to me. You're named Arcadia, eh? That's a good Trantorian name. But 
where's your uncle? It says here you came in the company of Homir Munn, uncle." 

"He's been arrested," said Arcadia, drearily. 

"Arrested!" - from the two of them at once. "What for?" asked Mamma. "He did something?" 

She shook her head. "I don't know. We were just on a visit. Uncle Homir had business with 
Lord Stettin but-" She needed no effort to act a shudder. It was there. 

Pappa was impressed. "With Lord Stettin. Mm-m-m, your uncle must be a big man." 

"I don't know what it was all about, but Lord Stettin wanted me to stay-" She was recalling the 
last words of Lady Callia, which had been acted out for her benefit. Since Callia, as she now 
knew, was an expert, the story could do for a second time. 

She paused, and Mamma said interestedly, "And why you?" 

"I'm not sure. He ... he wanted to have dinner with me all alone, but I said no, because I wanted 
Uncle Homir along. He looked at me funny and kept holding my shoulder." 

Pappa's mouth was a little open, but Mamma was suddenly red and angry. "How old are you, 
Arcadia?" 

"Fourteen and a half, almost." 

Mamma drew a sharp breath and said, "That such people should be let live. The dogs in the 
streets are better. You're running from him, dear, is not?" 



Arcadia nodded. 

Mamma said, "Pappa, go right to Information and find out exactly when the ship to Trantor 
comes to berth. Hurry!" 

But Pappa took one step and stopped. Loud metallic words were booming overhead, and five 
thousand pairs of eyes looked startledly upwards. 

"Men and women," it said, with sharp force. "The airport is being searched for a dangerous 
fugitive, and it is now surrounded. No one can enter and no one can leave. The search will, 
however, be conducted with great speed and no ships will reach or leave berth during the 
interval, so you will not miss your ship. I repeat, no one will miss his ship. The grid will descend. 
None of you will move outside your square until the grid is removed, as otherwise we will be 
forced to use our neuronic whips." 

During the minute or less in which the voice dominated the vast dome of the spaceport's 
waiting room, Arcadia could not have moved if all the evil in the Galaxy had concentrated itself 
into a ball and hurled itself at her. 

They could mean only her. It was not even necessary to formulate that idea as a specific 
thought. But why- 

Callia had engineered her escape. And Callia was of the Second Foundation. Why, then, the 
search now? Had Callia failed? Could Callia fail? Or was this part of the plan, the intricacies of 
which escaped her? 

For a vertiginous moment, she wanted to jump up and shout that she gave up, that she would 
go with them, that ... that- 

But Mamma's hand was on her wrist. "Quick! "Quick! Well go to the lady's room before they 
start." 

Arcadia did not understand. She merely followed blindly. They oozed through the crowd, frozen 
as it was into clumps, with the voice still booming through its last words. 

The grid was descending now, and Pappa, openmouthed, watched it come down. He had 
heard of it and read of it, but had never actually been the object of it. It glimmered in the air, 
simply a series of cross-hatched and tight radiation-beams that set the air aglow in a harmless 
network of flashing light. 

It always was so arranged as to descend slowly from above in order that it might represent a 
falling net with all the terrific psychological implications of entrapment. 

It was at waist-level now, ten feet between glowing lines in each direction. In his own hundred 
square feet, Pappa found himself alone, yet the adjoining squares were crowded. He felt 
himself conspicuously isolated but knew that to move into the greater anonymity of a group 
would have meant crossing one of those glowing lines, stirring an alarm, and bringing down the 
neuronic whip. 


He waited. 



He could make out over the heads of the eerily quiet and waiting mob, the far-off stir that was 
the line of policemen covering the vast floor area, lighted square by lighted square. 

It was a long time before a uniform stepped into his square and carefully noted its co-ordinates 
into an official notebook. 

"Papers!" 

Pappa handed them over, and they were flipped through in expert fashion. 

"You're Preem Palver, native of Trantor, on Kalgan for a month, returning to Trantor. Answer, 
yes or no." 

"Yes, yes." 

"What's your business on Kalgan?" 

"I'm trading representative of our farm co-operative. I've been negotiating terms with the 
Department of Agriculture on Kalgan. 

"Um-m-m. Your wife is with you? Where is she? She is mentioned in your papers." 

"Please. My wife is in the-" He pointed. 

"Hanto," roared the policeman. Another uniform joined him. 

The first one said, dryly, "Another dame in the can, by the Galaxy. The place must be busting 
with them. Write down her name." He indicated the entry in the papers which gave it. 

"Anyone else with you?" 

"My niece." 

"She's not mentioned in the papers." 

"She came separately." 

"Where is she? Never mind, I know. Write down the niece's name, too, Hanto. What's her 
name? Write down Arcadia Palver. You stay right here, Palver. We'll take care of the women 
before we leave." 

Pappa waited interminably. And then, long, long after, Mamma was marching toward him, 
Arcadia's hand firmly in hers, the two policemen trailing behind her. 

They entered Pappa's square, and one said, "Is this noisy old woman your wife?" 

"Yes, sir," said Pappa, placatingly. 

"Then you'd better tell her she's liable to get into trouble if she talks the way she does to the 
First Citizen's police." He straightened his shoulders angrily. "Is this your niece?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"I want her papers." 



Looking straight at her husband, Mamma slightly, but no less firmly, shook her head. 

A short pause, and Pappa said with a weak smile, "I don't think I can do that." 

"What do you mean you can't do that?" The policeman thrust out a hard palm. "Hand it over." 
"Diplomatic immunity," said Pappa, softly. 

"What do you mean?" 

"I said I was trading representative of my farm co-operative. I'm accredited to the Kalganian 
government as an official foreign representative and my papers prove it. I showed them to you 
and now I don't want to be bothered any more." 

For a moment, the policeman was taken aback. "I got to see your papers. It's orders." 

"You go away," broke in Mamma, suddenly. "When we want you, we'll send for you, you ... you 
bum. " 

The policeman's lips tightened. "Keep your eye on them, Hanto. I'll get the lieutenant." 

"Break a leg!" called Mamma after him. Someone laughed, and then choked it off suddenly. 

The search was approaching its end. The crowd was growing dangerously restless. Forty-five 
minutes had elapsed since the grid had started falling and that is too long for best effects. 
Lieutenant Dirige threaded his way hastily, therefore, toward the dense center of the mob. 

"Is this the girl?" he asked wearily. He looked at her and she obviously fitted the description. All 
this for a child. 

He said, "Her papers, if you please?" 

Pappa began, "I have already explained-" 

"I know what you have explained, and I'm sorry," said the lieutenant, "but I have my orders, and 
I can't help them. If you care to make a protest later, you may. Meanwhile, if necessary, I must 
use force." 

There was a pause, and the lieutenant waited patiently. 

Then Pappa said, huskily, "Give me your papers, Arcadia." 

Arcadia shook her head in panic, but Pappa nodded his head. "Don't be afraid. Give them to 
me." 

Helplessly she reached out and let the documents change hands. Pappa fumbled them open 
and looked carefully through them, then handed them over. The lieutenant in his turn looked 
through them carefully. For a long moment, he raised his eyes to rest them on Arcadia, and 
then he closed the booklet with a sharp snap. 

"All in order," he said. "All right, men." 

He left, and in two minutes, scarcely more, the grid was gone, and the voice above signified a 



back-to-normal. The noise of the crowd, suddenly released, rose high. 

Arcadia said: "How ... how-" 

Pappa said, "Sh-h. Don't say a word. Let's better go to the ship. It should be in the berth soon." 

They were on the ship. They had a private stateroom and a table to themselves in the dining 
room. Two light-years already separated them from Kalgan, and Arcadia finally dared to broach 
the subject again. 

She said, "But they were after me, Mr. Palver, and they must have had my description and all 
the details. Why did he let me go?" 

And Pappa smiled broadly over his roast beef. "Well, Arcadia, child, it was easy. When you've 
been dealing with agents and buyers and competing co-operatives, you learn some of the 
tricks. I've had twenty years or more to learn them in. You see, child, when the lieutenant 
opened your papers, he found a five hundred credit bill inside, folded up small. Simple, no?" 

"I’ll pay you back- Honest, I've got lots of money." 

"Well," Pappa's broad face broke into an embarrassed smile, as he waved it away. "For a 
country-woman-" 

Arcadia desisted. "But what if he'd taken the money and turned me in anyway. And accused me 
of bribery." 

"And give up five hundred credits? I know these people better than you do, girl." 

But Arcadia knew that he did not know people better. Not these people. In her bed that night, 
she considered carefully, and knew that no bribe would have stopped a police lieutenant in the 
matter of catching her unless that had been planned. They didn't want to catch her, yet had 
made every motion of doing so, nevertheless. 

Why? To make sure she left? And for Trantor? Were the obtuse and soft-hearted couple she 
was with now only a pair of tools in the hands of the Second Foundation, as helpless as she 
herself? 

They must be! 

Or were they? 

It was all so useless. How could she fight them. Whatever she did, it might only be what those 
terrible omnipotents wanted her to do. 

Yet she had to outwit them. Had to. Had to! Had to!! 


16 



Beginning of War 

For reason or reasons unknown to members of the Galaxy at the time of the era under 
discussion, Intergalactic Standard Time defines its fundamental unit, the second, as the time in 
which light travels 299,776 kilometers. 86,400 seconds are arbitrarily set equal to one 
Intergalactic Standard Day; and 365 of these days to one Intergalactic Standard Year. 

Why 299,776?- Or 86,400?- Or 365? 

Tradition, says the historian, begging the question. Because of certain and various mysterious 
numerical relationships, say the mystics, cultists, numerologists, metaphysicists. Because the 
original home-planet of humanity had certain natural periods of rotation and revolution from 
which those relationships could be derived, say a very few. 

No one really knew. 

Nevertheless, the date on which the Foundation cruiser, the Hober Mallow met the Kalganian 
squadron, headed by the Fearless, and, upon refusing to allow a search party to board, was 
blasted into smoldering wreckage was 185; 11692 G.E. That is, it was the 185th day of the 
1 1 ,692nd year of the Galactic Era which dated from the accession of the first Emperor of the 
traditional Kamble dynasty. It was also 1 85; 41 9 A.S. - dating from the birth of Seldon - or 1 85; 
348 Y.F. - dating from the establishment of the Foundation. On Kalgan it was 185; 56 F.C. - 
dating from the establishment of the First Citizenship by the Mule. In each case, of course, for 
convenience, the year was so arranged as to yield the same day number regardless of the 
actual day upon which the era began. 

And, in addition, to all the millions of worlds of the Galaxy, there were millions of local times, 
based on the motions of their own particular heavenly neighbors. 

But whichever you choose: 185; 11 692-41 9-348-56 - or anything - it was this day which 
historians later pointed to when they spoke of the start of the Stettinian war. 

Yet to Dr. Darell, it was none of these at all. It was simply and quite precisely the thirty-second 
day since Arcadia had left Terminus. 

What it cost Darell to maintain stolidity through these days was not obvious to everyone. 

But Elvett Semic thought he could guess. Fie was an old man and fond of saying that his 
neuronic sheaths had calcified to the point where his thinking processes were stiff and 
unwieldy. Fie invited and almost welcomed the universal underestimation of his decaying 
powers by being the first to laugh at them. But his eyes were none the less seeing for being 
faded; his mind none the less experienced and wise, for being no longer agile. 

Fie merely twisted his pinched lips and said, "Why don't you do something about it?" 

The sound was a physical jar to Darell, under which he winced. Fie said, gruffly, "Where were 
we?" 


Semic regarded him with grave eyes. "You'd better do something about the girl." FHis sparse, 
yellow teeth showed in a mouth that was open in inquiry. 



But Darell replied coldly, "The question is: Can you get a Symes-Molff Resonator in the range 
required?" 

Well, I said I could and you weren't listening-" 

"I'm sorry, Elvett. It's like this. What we're doing now can be more important to everyone in the 
Galaxy than the question of whether Arcadia is safe. At least, to everyone but Arcadia and 
myself, and I'm willing to go along with the majority. How big would the Resonator be?" 

Semic looked doubtful, "I don't know. You can find it somewheres in the catalogues." 

"About how big. A ton? A pound? A block long?" 

"Oh, I thought you meant exactly. It's a little jigger." He indicated the first joint of his thumb. 
"About that." 

"All right, can you do something like this?" He sketched rapidly on the pad he held in his lap, 
then passed it over to the old physicist, who peered at it doubtfully, then chuckled. 

"Y'know, the brain gets calcified when you get as old as I am. What are you trying to do?" 

Darell hesitated. He longed desperately, at the moment, for the physical knowledge locked in 
the other's brain, so that he need not put his thought into words. But the longing was useless, 
and he explained. 

Semic was shaking his head. "You'd need hyper-relays. The only things that would work fast 
enough. A thundering lot of them." 

"But it can be built?" 

"Well, sure." 

"Can you get all the parts? I mean, without causing comment? In line with your general work." 

Semic lifted his upper lip. "Can't get fifty hyper-relays? I wouldn't use that many in my whole 
life." 

"We're on a defense project, now. Can't you think of something harmless that would use them? 
We've got the money." 

"Hm-m-m. Maybe I can think of something." 

"How small can you make the whole gadget?" 

"Hyper-relays can be had micro-size ... wiring ... tubes - Space, you've got a few hundred 
circuits there." 

"I know. How big?" 

Semic indicated with his hands. 

"Too big," said Darell. "I've got to swing it from my belt" 



Slowly, he was crumpling his sketch into a tight ball. When it was a hard, yellow grape, he 
dropped it into the ash tray and it was gone with the tiny white flare of molecular decomposition. 

He said, "Who's at your door?" 

Semic leaned over his desk to the little milky screen above the door signal. He said, "The 
young fellow, Anthor. Someone with him, too." 

Darell scraped his chair back. "Nothing about this, Semic, to the others yet. It's deadly 
knowledge, if they find out, and two lives are enough to risk." 

Pelleas Anthor was a pulsing vortex of activity in Semic's office, which, somehow, managed to 
partake of the age of its occupant. In the slow turgor of the quiet room, the loose, summery 
sleeves of Anthor's tunic seemed still a-quiver with the outer breezes. 

He said, "Dr. Darell, Dr. Semic - Orum Dirige." 

The other man was tall. A long straight nose that lent his thin face a saturnine appearance. Dr. 
Darell held out a hand. 

Anthor smiled slightly. "Police Lieutenant Dirige," he amplified. Then, significantly, "Of Kalgan." 

And Darell turned to stare with force at the young man. "Police Lieutenant Dirige of Kalgan," he 
repeated, distinctly. "And you bring him here. Why?" 

"Because he was the last man on Kalgan to see your daughter. Hold, man." 

Anthor's look of triumph was suddenly one of concern, and he was between the two, struggling 
violently with Darell. Slowly, and not gently, he forced the older man back into the chair. 

"What are you trying to do?" Anthor brushed a lock of brown hair from his forehead, tossed a 
hip lightly upon the desk, and swung a leg, thoughtfully. "I thought I was bringing you good 
news." 

Darell addressed the policeman directly, "What does he mean by calling you the last man to 
see my daughter? Is my daughter dead? Please tell me without preliminary." His face was 
white with apprehension. 

Lieutenant Dirige said expressionlessly, "‘Last man on Kalgan' was the phrase. She's not on 
Kalgan now. I have no knowledge past that." 

"Here," broke in Anthor, "let me put it straight. Sorry if I overplayed the drama a bit, Doc. You're 
so inhuman about this, I forget you have feelings. In the first place, Lieutenant Dirige is one of 
us. He was born on Kalgan, but his father was a Foundation man brought to that planet in the 
service of the Mule. I answer for the lieutenant's loyalty to the Foundation. 

"Now I was in touch with him the day after we stopped getting the daily report from Munn-" 

"Why?" broke in Darell, fiercely. "I thought it was quite decided that we were not to make a 
move in the matter. You were risking their lives and ours." 

"Because," was the equally fierce retort, "I've been involved in this game for longer than you. 



Because I know of certain contacts on Kalgan of which you know nothing. Because I act from 
deeper knowledge, do you understand?" 

"I think you're completely mad." 

"Will you listen?" 

A pause, and Darell's eyes dropped. 

Anthor's lips quirked into a half smile, "All right, Doc. Give me a few minutes. Tell him, Dirige." 

Dirige spoke easily: "As far as I know, Dr. Darell, your daughter is at Trantor. At least, she had 
a ticket to Trantor at the Eastern Spaceport. She was with a Trading Representative from that 
planet who claimed she was his niece. Your daughter seems to have a queer collection of 
relatives, doctor. That was the second uncle she had in a period of two weeks, eh? The 
Trantorian even tried to bribe me - probably thinks that's why they got away." He smiled grimly 
at the thought. 

"How was she?" 

"Unharmed, as far as I could see. Frightened. I don't blame her for that. The whole department 
was after her. I still don't know why." 

Darell drew a breath for what seemed the first time in several minutes. He was conscious of the 
trembling of his hands and controlled them with an effort. "Then she's all right. This Trading 
Representative, who was he? Go back to him. What part does he play in it?" 

"I don't know. Do you know anything about Trantor?" 

"I lived there once." 

"It's an agricultural world, now. Exports animal fodder and grains, mostly. High quality! They sell 
them all over the Galaxy. There are a dozen or two farm co-operatives on the planet and each 
has its representatives overseas. Shrewd sons of guns, too- I knew this one's record. He'd 
been on Kalgan before, usually with his wife. Perfectly honest. Perfectly harmless." 

"Um-m-m," said Anthor. "Arcadia was born in Trantor, wasn't she, Doc?" 

Darell nodded. 

"It hangs together, you see. She wanted to go away - quickly and far - and Trantor would 
suggest itself. Don't you think so?" 

Darell said: "Why not back here?" 

"Perhaps she was being pursued and felt that she had to double off in a new angle, eh?' 

Dr. Darell lacked the heart to question further. Well, then, let her be safe on Trantor, or as safe 
as one could be anywhere in this dark and horrible Galaxy. He groped toward the door, felt 
Anthor's light touch on his sleeve, and stopped, but did not turn. 

"Mind if I go home with you, Doc?" 



"You're welcome," was the automatic response. 

By evening, the exteriormost reaches of Dr. Darell's personality, the ones that made immediate 
contact with other people had solidified once more. He had refused to eat his evening meal and 
had, instead, with feverish insistence, returned to the inchwise advance into the intricate 
mathematics of encephalographic analysis. 

It was not till nearly midnight, that he entered the living room again. 

Pelleas Anthor was still there, twiddling at the controls of the video. The footsteps behind him 
caused him to glance over his shoulder. 

"Hi. Aren't you in bed yet? I've been spending hours on the video, trying to get something other 
than bulletins. It seems the F.S. Hober Mallow is delayed in course and hasn't been heard 
from" 

"Really? What do they suspect?" 

"What do you think? Kalganian skulduggery. There are reports that Kalganian vessels were 
sighted in the general space sector in which the Hober Mallow was last heard from?" 

Darell shrugged, and Anthor rubbed his forehead doubtfully. 

"Look doc," he said, "why don't you go to Trantor?" 

"Why should I?" 

"Because "You're no good to us here. You're not yourself. You can't be. And you could 
accomplish a purpose by going to Trantor, too. The old Imperial Library with the complete 
records of the Proceedings of the Seldon Commission are there-" 

"No! The Library has been picked clean and it hasn't helped anyone." 

"It helped Ebling Mis once." 

"How do you know? Yes, he said he found the Second Foundation, and my mother killed him 
five seconds later as the only way to keep him from unwittingly revealing its location to the 
Mule. But in doing so, she also, you realize, made it impossible ever to tell whether Mis really 
did know the location. After all, no one else has ever been able to deduce the truth from those 
records." 

"Ebling Mis, if you'll remember, was working under the driving impetus of the Mule's mind." 

"I know that, too, but Mis' mind was, by that very token, in an abnormal state. Do you and I 
know anything about the properties of a mind under the emotional control of another; about its 
abilities and shortcomings? In any case, I will not go to Trantor." 

Anthor frowned, "Well, why the vehemence? I merely suggested it as - well, by Space, I don't 
understand you. You look ten years older. You're obviously having a hellish time of it. You're 
not doing anything of value here. If I were you, I'd go and get the girl." 

"Exactly! It's what I want to do, too. That's why I won't do it. Look, Anthor, and try to understand. 



You're playing - we're both playing - with something completely beyond our powers to fight. In 
cold blood, if you have any, you know that, whatever you may think in your moments of 
quixoticism. 

"For fifty years, we've known that the Second Foundation is the real descendent and pupil of 
Seldonian mathematics. What that means, and you know that, too, is that nothing in the Galaxy 
happens which does not play a part in their reckoning. To us, all life is a series of accidents, to 
be met with by improvisations To them, all life is purposive and should be met by 
precalculation. 

"But they have their weakness. Their work is statistical and only the mass action of humanity is 
truly inevitable. Now how / play a part, as an individual, in the foreseen course of history, I don't 
know. Perhaps I have no definite part, since the Plan leaves individuals to indeterminacy and 
free will. But I am important and they - they , you understand - may at least have calculated my 
probable reaction. So I distrust, my impulses, my desires, my probable reactions. 

"I would rather present them with an improbable reaction. I will stay here, despite the fact that I 
yearn very desperately to leave. "No! Because I yearn very desperately to leave." 

The younger man smiled sourly. "You don't know your own mind as well as they might. 

Suppose that - knowing you - they might count on what you think, merely think, is the 
improbable reaction, simply by knowing in advance what your line of reasoning would be." 

"In that case, there is no escape. For if I follow the reasoning you have just outlined and go to 
Trantor, they may have foreseen that, too. There is an endless cycle of 

double-double-double-double-crosses. No matter how far I follow that cycle, I can only either go 
or stay. The intricate act of luring my daughter halfway across the Galaxy cannot be meant to 
make me stay where I am, since I would most certainly have stayed if they had done nothing. It 
can only be to make me move, and so I will stay. 

"And besides, Anthor, not everything bears the breath of the Second Foundation; not all events 
are the results of their puppeting. They may have had nothing to do with Arcadia's leave-taking, 
and she may be safe on Trantor when all the rest of us are dead." 

"No," said Anthor, sharply, "now you are off the track." 

"You have an alternative interpretation?" 

"I have - if you’ll listen." 

"Oh, go ahead. I don't lack patience." 

"Well, then - how well do you know your own daughter?" 

"Flow well can any individual know any other? Obviously, my knowledge is inadequate." 

"So is mine on that basis, perhaps even more so - but at least, I viewed her with fresh eyes. 
Item one: She is a ferocious little romantic, the only child of an ivory-tower academician, 
growing up in an unreal world of video and book-film adventure. She lives in a weird 
self-constructed fantasy of espionage and intrigue. Item two: She's intelligent about it; intelligent 



enough to outwit us, at any rate. She planned carefully to overhear our first conference and 
succeeded. She planned carefully to go to Kalgan with Munn and succeeded. Item three: She 
has an unholy hero-worship of her grandmother - your mother - who defeated the Mule. 

"I'm right so far, I think? All right, then. Now, unlike you, I've received a complete report from 
Lieutenant Dirige and, in addition, my sources of information on Kalgan are rather complete, 
and all sources check. We know, for instance, that Homir Munn, in conference with the Lord of 
Kalgan was refused admission to the Mule's Palace, and that this refusal was suddenly 
abrogated after Arcadia had spoken to Lady Callia, the First Citizen's very good friend." 

Darell interrupted. "And how do you know all this?" 

"For one thing, Munn was interviewed by Dirige as part of the police campaign to locate 
Arcadia. Naturally, we have a complete transcript of the questions and answers. 

"And take Lady Callia herself. It is rumored that she has lost Stettin's interest, but the rumor 
isn't borne out by facts. She not only remains unreplaced; is not only able to mediate the lord's 
refusal to Munn into an acceptance; but can even engineer Arcadia's escape openly. Why, a 
dozen of the soldiers about Stettin's executive mansion testified that they were seen together 
on the last evening. Yet she remains unpunished. This despite the fact that Arcadia was 
searched for with every appearance of diligence." 

"But what is your conclusion from all this torrent of ill-connection?" 

"That Arcadia's escape was arranged." 

"As I said." 

"With this addition. That Arcadia must have known it was arranged; that Arcadia, the bright little 
girl who saw cabals everywhere, saw this one and followed your own type of reasoning. They 
wanted her to return to the Foundation, and so she went to Trantor, instead. But why Trantor?" 

"Well, why?" 

"Because that is where Bayta, her idolized grandmother, escaped when she was in flight. 
Consciously or unconsciously, Arcadia imitated that. I wonder, then, if Arcadia was fleeing the 
same enemy." 

"The Mule?" asked Darell with polite sarcasm. 

"Of course not. I mean, by the enemy, a mentality that she could not fight. She was running 
from the Second Foundation, or such influence thereof as could be found on Kalgan." 

"What influence is this you speak of?" 

"Do you expect Kalgan to be immune from that ubiquitous menace? We both have come to the 
conclusion, somehow, that Arcadia's escape was arranged. Right? She was searched for and 
found, but deliberately allowed to slip away by Dirige. By Dirige, do you understand? But how 
was that? Because he was our man. But how did they know that? Were they counting on him to 
be a traitor? Eh, doc?" 



"Now you're saying that they honestly meant to recapture her. Frankly, you're tiring me a bit, 
Anthor. Finish your say; I want to go to bed." 

"My say is quickly finished." Anthor reached for a small group of photo-records in his inner 
pocket. It was the familiar wigglings of the encephalograph. "Dirige's brainwaves," Anthor said, 
casually, "taken since he returned." 

It was quite visible to Darell's naked eye, and his face was gray when he looked up. "Fie is 
Controlled." 

"Exactly. Fie allowed Arcadia to escape not because he was our man but because he was the 
Second Foundation's." 

"Even after he knew she was going to Trantor, and not to Terminus." 

Anthor shrugged. "Fie had been geared to let her go. There was no way he could modify that. 
Fie was only a tool, you see. It was just that Arcadia followed the least probable course, and is 
probably safe. Or at least safe until such time as the Second Foundation can modify the plans 
to take into account this changed state of affairs-" 

Fie paused. The little signal light on the video set was flashing. On an independent circuit, it 
signified the presence of emergency news. Darell saw it, too, and with the mechanical 
movement of long habit turned on the video. They broke in upon the middle of a sentence but 
before its completion, they knew that the Hober Mallow, or the wreck thereof, had been found 
and that, for the first time in nearly half a century, the Foundation was again at war. 

Anthor's jaw was set in a hard line. "All right, doc, you heard that. Kalgan has attacked; and 
Kalgan is under the control of the Second Foundation. Will you follow your daughter's lead and 
move to Trantor?" 

"No. I will risk it. Here." 

"Dr. Darell. You are not as intelligent as your daughter. I wonder how far you can be trusted." 
His long level stare held Darell for a moment, and then without a word, he left. 

And Darell was left in uncertainty and - almost - despair. 

Unheeded, the video was a medley of excited sight-sound, as it described in nervous detail the 
first hour of the war between Kalgan and the Foundation. 

17 

War 

The mayor of the Foundation brushed futilely at the picket fence of hair that rimmed his skull. 
He sighed. "The years that we have wasted; the chances we have thrown away. I make no 
recriminations, Dr. Darell, but we deserve defeat." 


Darell said, quietly, "I see no reason for lack of confidence in events, sir. 



"Lack of confidence! Lack of confidence! By the Galaxy, Dr. Darell, on what would you base 
any other attitude? Come here-" 

He half-led half-forced Darell toward the limpid ovoid cradled gracefully on its tiny force-field 
support. At a touch of the mayor's hand, it glowed within - an accurate three-dimensional 
model of the Galactic double-spiral. 

"In yellow," said the mayor, excitedly, "we have that region of Space under Foundation control; 
in red, that under Kalgan." 

What Darell saw was a crimson sphere resting within a stretching yellow fist that surrounded it 
on all sides but that toward the center of the Galaxy. 

"Galactography," said the mayor, "is our greatest enemy. Our admirals make no secret of our 
almost hopeless, strategic position. Observe. The enemy has inner lines of communication. He 
is concentrated; can meet us on all sides with equal ease. He can defend himself with minimum 
force. 

"We are expanded. The average distance between inhabited systems within the Foundation is 
nearly three times that within Kalgan. To go from Santanni to Locris, for instance, is a voyage of 
twenty-five hundred parsecs for us, but only eight hundred parsecs for them, if we remain within 
our respective territories-" 

Darell said, "I understand all that, sir." 

"And you do not understand that it may mean defeat." 

"There is more than distance to war. I say we cannot lose. It is quite impossible." 

"And why do you say that?" 

"Because of my own interpretation of the Seldon Plan." 

"Oh," the mayor's lips twisted, and the hands behind his back flapped one within the other, 

"then you rely, too, on the mystical help of the Second Foundation." 

"No. Merely on the help of inevitability - and of courage and persistence." 

And yet behind his easy confidence, he wondered- 

What if- 

Well- What if Anthor were right, and Kalgan were a direct tool of the mental wizards. What if it 
was their purpose to defeat and destroy the Foundation. No! It made no sense! 

And yet- 

He smiled bitterly. Always the same. Always that peering and peering through the opaque 
granite which, to the enemy, was so transparent. 

Nor were the galactographic verities of the situation lost upon Stettin. 



The Lord of Kalgan stood before a twin of the Galactic model which the mayor and Darell had 
inspected. Except that where the mayor frowned, Stettin smiled. 

His admiral's uniform glistered imposingly upon his massive figure. The crimson sash of the 
Order of the Mule awarded him by the former First Citizen whom six months later he had 
replaced somewhat forcefully, spanned his chest diagonally from right shoulder to waist. The 
Silver Star with Double Comets and Swords sparkled brilliantly upon his left shoulder. 

He addressed the six men of his general staff whose uniforms were only less grandiloquent 
than his own, and his First Minister as well, thin and gray - a darkling cobweb, lost in the 
brightness. 

Stettin said, "I think the decisions are clear. We can afford to wait. To them, every day of delay 
will be another blow at their morale. If they attempt to defend all portions of their realm, they will 
be spread thin and we can strike through in two simultaneous thrusts here and here." He 
indicated the directions on the Galactic model - two lances of pure white shooting through the 
yellow fist from the red ball it inclosed, cutting Terminus off on either side in a tight arc. "In such 
a manner, we cut their fleet into three parts which can be defeated in detail. If they concentrate, 
they give up two-thirds of their dominions voluntarily and will probably risk rebellion." 

The First Minister's thin voice alone seeped through the hush that followed. "In six months," he 
said, "the Foundation will grow six months stronger. Their resources are greater, as we all 
know, their navy is numerically stronger; their manpower is virtually inexhaustible. Perhaps a 
quick thrust would be safer." 

His was easily the least influential voice in the room. Lord Stettin smiled and made a flat 
gesture with his hand. "The six months - or a year, if necessary - will cost us nothing. The men 
of the Foundation cannot prepare; they are ideologically incapable of it. It is in their very 
philosophy to believe that the Second Foundation will save them. But not this time, eh?" 

The men in the room stirred uneasily. 

"You lack confidence, I believe," said Stettin, frigidly. "Is it necessary once again to describe the 
reports of our agents in Foundation territory, or to repeat the findings of Mr. Homir Munn, the 
Foundation agent now in our ... uh ... service? Let us adjourn, gentlemen." 

Stettin returned to his private chambers with a fixed smile still on his face. He sometimes 
wondered about this Homir Munn. A queer water-spined fellow who certainly did not bear out 
his early promise. And yet he crawled with interesting information that carried conviction with it 
- particularly when Callia was present. 

His smile broadened. That fat fool had her uses, after all. At least, she got more with her 
wheedling out of Munn than he could, and with less trouble. Why not give her to Munn? He 
frowned. Callia. She and her stupid jealousy. Space! If he still had the Darell girl- Why hadn't he 
ground her skull to powder for that? 

He couldn't quite put his finger on the reason. 

Maybe because she got along with Munn. And he needed Munn. It was Munn, for instance, 
who had demonstrated that, at least in the belief of the Mule, there was no Second Foundation. 



His admirals needed that assurance. 


He would have liked to make the proofs public, but it was better to let the Foundation believe in 
their nonexistent help. Was it actually Callia who had pointed that out? That's right. She had 
said- 

Oh, nonsense! She couldn't have said anything. 

And yet- 

He shook his head to clear it and passed on. 


18 

Ghost of a World 

Trantor was a world in dregs and rebirth. Set like a faded jewel in the midst of the bewildering 
crowd of suns at the center of the Galaxy - in the heaps and clusters of stars piled high with 
aimless prodigality - it alternately dreamed of past and future. 

Time had been when the insubstantial ribbons of control had stretched out from its metal 
coating to the very edges of stardom. It had been a single city, housing four hundred billion 
administrators; the mightiest capital that had ever been. 

Until the decay of the Empire eventually reached it and in the Great Sack of a century ago, its 
drooping powers had been bent back upon themselves and broken forever. In the blasting ruin 
of death, the metal shell that circled the planet wrinkled and crumpled into an aching mock of its 
own grandeur. 

The survivors tore up the metal plating and sold it to other planets for seed and cattle. The soil 
was uncovered once more and the planet returned to its beginnings. In the spreading areas of 
primitive agriculture, it forgot its intricate and colossal past. 

Or would have but for the still mighty shards that heaped their massive ruins toward the sky in 
bitter and dignified silence. 

Arcadia watched the metal rim of the horizon with a stirring of the heart. The village in which the 
Palvers lived was but a huddle of houses to her - small and primitive. The fields that 
surrounded it were golden-yellow, wheat-clogged tracts. 

But there, just past the reaching point was the memory of the past, still glowing in unrusted 
splendor, and burning with fire where the sun of Trantor caught it in gleaming highlights. She 
had been there once during the months since she had arrived at Trantor. She had climbed onto 
the smooth, unjointed pavement and ventured into the silent dust-streaked structures, where 
the light entered through the jags of broken walls and partitions. 

It had been solidified heartache. It had been blasphemy. 

She had left, clangingly - running until her feet pounded softly on earth once more. 



And then she could only look back longingly. She dared not disturb that mighty brooding once 
more. 

Somewhere on this world, she knew, she had been born - near the old Imperial Library, which 
was the veriest Trantor of Trantor. It was the sacred of the sacred; the holy of holies! Of all the 
world, it alone had survived the Great Sack and for a century it had remained complete and 
untouched; defiant of the universe. 

There Hari Seldon and his group had woven their unimaginable web. There Ebling Mis pierced 
the secret, and sat numbed in his vast surprise, until he was killed to prevent the secret from 
going further. 

There at the Imperial Library, her grandparents had lived for ten years, until the Mule died, and 
they could return to the reborn Foundation. 

There at the Imperial Library, her own father returned with his bride to find the Second 
Foundation once again, but failed. There, she had been born and there her mother had died. 

She would have liked to visit the Library, but Preem Palver shook his round head. "It's 
thousands of miles, Arkady, and there's so much to do here. Besides, it's not good to bother 
there. You know; it's a shrine-" 

But Arcadia knew that he had no desire to visit the Library; that it was a case of the Mule's 
Palace over again. There was this superstitious fear on the part of the pygmies of the present 
for the relies of the giants of the past. 

Yet it would have been horrible to feel a grudge against the funny little man for that. She had 
been on Trantor now for nearly three months and in all that time, he and she - Pappa and 
Mamma - had been wonderful to her- 

And what was her return? Why, to involve them in the common ruin. Had she warned them that 
she was marked for destruction, perhaps? No! She let them assume the deadly role of 
protectors. 

Her conscience panged unbearably - yet what choice had she? 

She stepped reluctantly down the stairs to breakfast. The voices reached her. 

Preem Palver had tucked the napkin down his shirt collar with a twist of his plump neck and 
had reached for his poached eggs with an uninhibited satisfaction. 

"I was down in the city yesterday, Mamma," he said, wielding his fork and nearly drowning the 
words with a capacious mouthful. 

"And what is down in the city, Pappa?" asked Mamma indifferently, sitting down, looking 
sharply about the table, and rising again for the salt. 

"Ah, not so good. A ship came in from out Kalgan-way with newspapers from there. It's war 
there." 


War! So! Well, let them break their heads, if they have no more sense inside. Did your pay 



check come yet? Pappa, I'm telling you again. You warn old man Cosker this isn't the only 
cooperative in the world. It's bad enough they pay you what I'm ashamed to tell my friends, but 
at least on time they could be!" 

"Time; shmime," said Pappa, irritably. "Look, don't make me silly talk at breakfast, it should 
choke me each bite in the throat," and he wreaked havoc among the buttered toast as he said 
it. He added, somewhat more moderately, "The fighting is between Kalgan and the Foundation, 
and for two months, they've been at it." 

His hands lunged at one another in mock-representation of a space fight. 

"Um-m-m. And what's doing?" 

"Bad for the Foundation. Well, you saw Kalgan; all soldiers. They were ready. The Foundation 
was not, and so - poof T 

And suddenly, Mamma laid down her fork and hissed, "Fool!" 

"Huh?" 

"Dumb-head! Your big mouth is always moving and wagging." 

She was pointing quickly and when Pappa looked over his shoulder, there was Arcadia, frozen 
in the doorway. 

She said, "The Foundation is at war?" 

Pappa looked helplessly at Mamma, then nodded. 

"And they're losing?" 

Again the nod. 

Arcadia felt the unbearable catch in her throat, and slowly approached the table. "Is it over?" 
she whispered. 

"Over?" repeated Pappa, with false heartiness. "Who said it was over? In war, lots of things can 
happen. And ... and-" 

"Sit down, darling," said Mamma, soothingly. "No one should talk before breakfast. You're not in 
a healthy condition with no food in the stomach." 

But Arcadia ignored her. "Are the Kalganians on Terminus?" 

"No," said Pappa, seriously. "The news is from last week, and Terminus is still fighting. This is 
honest. I'm telling the truth. And the Foundation is still strong. Do you want me to get you the 
newspapers?" 

"Yes!" 

She read them over what she could eat of her breakfast and her eyes blurred as she read. 
Santanni and Korell were gone - without a fight. A squadron of the Foundation's navy had been 
trapped in the sparsely-sunned Ifni sector and wiped out to almost the last ship. 



And now the Foundation was back to the Four-Kingdom core - the original Realm which had 
been built up under Salvor Hardin, the first mayor. But still it fought - and still there might be a 
chance-and whatever happened, she must inform her father. She must somehow reach his ear. 
She must! 

But how? With a war in the way. 

She asked Pappa after breakfast, "Are you going out on a new mission soon, Mr. Palver?" 

Pappa was on the large chair on the front lawn, sunning himself. A fat cigar smoldered between 
his plump fingers and he looked like a beatific pug-dog. 

"A mission?" he repeated, lazily. "Who knows? It's a nice vacation and my leave isn't up. Why 
talk about new missions? You're restless, Arkady?" 

"Me? No, I like it here. You're very good to me, you and Mrs. Palver." 

Fie waved his hand at her, brushing away her words. 

Arcadia said, "I was thinking about the war." 

"But don't think about it. What can you do? If it's something you can't help, why hurt yourself 
over it?" 

"But I was thinking that the Foundation has lost most of its farming worlds. They're probably 
rationing food there." 

Pappa looked uncomfortable. "Don't worry. It'll be all right." 

She scarcely listened. "I wish I could carry food to them, that's what. You know after the Mule 
died, and the Foundation rebelled, Terminus was just about isolated for a time and General 
Flan Pritcher, who succeeded the Mule for a while was laying siege to it. Food was running 
awfully low and my father says that his father told him that they only had dry amino-acid 
concentrates that tasted terrible. Why, one egg cost two hundred credits. And then they broke 
the siege just in time and food ships came through from Santanni. It must have been an awful 
time. Probably it's happening all over, now." 

There was a pause, and then Arcadia said, "You know, I'll bet the Foundation would be willing 
to pay smuggler's prices for food now. Double and triple and more. Gee, if any co-operative, f'r 
instance, here on Trantor took over the job, they might lose some ships, but, I'll bet they'd be 
war millionaires before it was over. The Foundation Traders in the old days used to do that all 
the time. There'd be a war, so they'd sell whatever was needed bad and take their chances. 
Golly, they used to make as much as two million dollars out of one trip - profit. That was just 
out of what they could carry on one ship, too." 

Pappa stirred. His cigar had gone out, unnoticed. "A deal for food, huh? Hm-m-m- But the 
Foundation is so far away." 

"Oh, I know. I guess you couldn't do it from here. If you took a regular liner you probably 
couldn't get closer than Massena or Smushyk, and after that you'd have to hire a small 



scoutship or something to slip you through the lines." 

Pappa's hand brushed at his hair, as he calculated. 

Two weeks later, arrangements for the mission were completed. Mamma railed for most of the 
time- First, at the incurable obstinacy with which he courted suicide. Then, at the incredible 
obstinacy with which he refused to allow her to accompany him. 

Pappa said, "Mamma, why do you act like an old lady. I can't take you. It's a man's work. What 
do you think a war is? Fun? Child's play?" 

"Then why do you go? Are you a man, you old fool - with a leg and half an arm in the grave. 

Let some of the young ones go - not a fat bald-head like you?" 

"I'm not a bald-head," retorted Pappa, with dignity. "I got yet lots of hair. And why should it not 
be me that gets the commission? Why, a young fellow? Listen, this could mean millions?" 

She knew that and she subsided. 

Arcadia saw him once before he left. 

She said, "Are you going to Terminus?" 

"Why not? You say yourself they need bread and rice and potatoes. Well, I'll make a deal with 
them, and they'll get it." 

"Well, then - just one thing: If you're going to Terminus, could you ... would you see my father?" 

And Pappa's face crinkled and seemed to melt into sympathy, "Oh - and I have to wait for you 
to tell me. Sure, I'll see him. I'll tell him you're safe and everything's O.K., and when the war is 
over, I'll bring you back." 

"Thanks. I'll tell you how to find him. His name is Dr. Toran Darell and he lives in Stanmark. 
That's just outside Terminus City, and you can get a little commuting plane that goes there. 
We’re at 55 Channel Drive." 

"Wait, and I’ll write it down." 

"No, no," Arcadia's arm shot out. "You mustn't write anything down. You must remember - and 
find him without anybody's help." 

Pappa looked puzzled. Then he shrugged his shoulders. "All right, then. It's 55 Channel Drive 
in Stanmark, outside Terminus City, and you commute there by plane. All right?" 

"One other thing." 

"Yes?" 

"Would you tell him something from me?" 

"Sure." 

"I want to whisper it to you." 



He leaned his plump cheek toward her, and the little whispered sound passed from one to the 
other. 

Pappa's eyes were round. "That's what you want me to say? But it doesn't make sense." 

"He'll know what you mean. Just say I sent it and that I said he would know what it means. And 
you say it exactly the way I told you. No different. You won't forget it?" 

"How can I forget it? Five little words. Look-" 

"No, no." She hopped up and down in the intensity of her feelings. "Don't repeat it. Don't ever 
repeat it to anyone. Forget all about it except to my father. Promise me." 

Pappa shrugged again. "I promise! All right!" 

"All right," she said, mournfully, and as he passed down the drive to where the air taxi waited to 
take him to the spaceport, she wondered if she had signed his death warrant. She wondered if 
she would ever see him again. 

She scarcely dared to walk into the house again to face the good, kind Mamma. Maybe when it 
was all over, she had better kill herself for what she had done to them. 

19 

End of War 

QUORISTON, BATTLE OF Fought on 9, 17, 377 F.E. between the forces of the Foundation 
and those of Lord Stettin of Kalgan, it was the last battle of consequence during the 
Interregnum .... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Jole Turbor, in his new role of war correspondent, found his bulk incased in a naval uniform, 
and rather liked it. He enjoyed being back on the air, and some of the fierce helplessness of the 
futile fight against the Second Foundation left him in the excitement of another sort of fight with 
substantial ships and ordinary men. 

To be sure, the Foundation's fight had not been remarkable for victories, but it was still possible 
to be philosophic about the matter. After six months, the hard core of the Foundation was 
untouched, and the hard core of the Fleet was still in being. With the new additions since the 
start of the war, it was almost as strong numerically, and stronger technically, than before the 
defeat at Ifni. 

And meanwhile, planetary defenses were being strengthened; the armed forces better trained; 
administrative efficiency was having some of the water squeezed out of it - and much of the 
Kalganian's conquering fleet was being wallowed down through the necessity of occupying the 
"conquered" territory. 


At the moment, Turbor was with the Third Fleet in the outer reaches of the Anacreonian sector. 



In line with his policy of making this a "little man's war," he was interviewing Fennel Leemor, 
Engineer Third Class, volunteer. 

"Tell us a little about yourself, sailor," said Turbor. 

"Ain't much to tell," Leemor shuffled his feet and allowed a faint, bashful smile to cover his face, 
as though he could see all the millions that undoubtedly could see him at the moment. I’m a 
Locrian. Got a job in an air-car factory; section head and good pay. I'm married; got two kids, 
both girls. Say, I couldn't say hello to them, could I - in case they're listening." 

"Go ahead, sailor. The video is all yours." 

"Gosh, thanks." He burbled, "Hello, Milla, in case you're listening, I'm fine. Is Sunni all right? 

And Tomma? I think of you all the time and maybe I'll be back on furlough after we get back to 
port. I got your food parcel but I'm sending it back. We get our regular mess, but they say the 
civilians are a little tight. I guess that's all." 

"I'll look her up next time I'm on Locris, sailor, and make sure she's not short of food. O.K.?" 

The young man smiled broadly and nodded his head. "Thank you, Mr. Turbor. I’d appreciate 
that." 

"All right. Suppose you tell us, then- You're a volunteer, aren't you?" 

"Sure am. If anyone picks a fight with me, I don't have to wait for anyone to drag me in. I joined 
up the day I heard about the Hober Mallow." 

"That's a fine spirit. Have you seen much action? I notice "You're wearing two battle stars." 

"Ptah."The sailor spat. "Those weren't battles, they were chases. The Kalganians don't fight, 
unless they have odds of five to one or better in their favor. Even then they just edge in and try 
to cut us up ship by ship. Cousin of mine was at Ifni and he was on a ship that got away, the old 
Ebling Mis. He says it was the same there. They had their Main Fleet against just a wing 
division of ours, and down to where we only had five ships left, they kept stalking instead of 
fighting. We got twice as many of their ships at that fight." 

"Then you think we're going to win the war?" 

Sure bet; now that we aren't retreating. Even if things got too bad, that's when I'd expect the 
Second Foundation to step in. We still got the Seldon Plan - and they know it, too." 

Turbor's lips curled a bit. "You're counting on the Second Foundation, then?" 

The answer came with honest surprise. "Well, doesn't everyone?" 

Junior Officer Tippellum stepped into Turbor's room after the visicast. He shoved a cigarette at 
the correspondent and knocked his cap back to a perilous balance on the occiput. 


We picked up a prisoner," he said. 
Yes?" 



"Little crazy fellow. Claims to be a neutral - diplomatic immunity, no less. I don't think they know 
what to do with him. His name's Palvro, Palver, something like that, and he says he's from 
Trantor. Don't know what in space he's doing in a war zone." 

But Turbor had swung to a sitting position on his bunk and the nap he had been about to take 
was forgotten. He remembered quite well his last interview with Darell, the day after war had 
been declared and he was shoving off. 

"Preem Palver," he said. It was a statement. 

Tippellum paused and let the smoke trickle out the sides of his mouth. "Yeah," he said, "how in 
space did you know?" 

"Never mind. Can I see him?" 

"Space, / can't say. The old man has him in his own room for questioning. Everyone figures 
he's a spy." 

"You tell the old man that I know him, if he's who he claims he is. I’ll take the responsibility." 

Captain Dixyl on the flagship of the Third Fleet watched unremittingly at the Grand Detector. No 
ship could avoid being a source of subatomic radiation - not even if it were lying an inert mass 
- and each focal point of such radiation was a little sparkle in the three-dimensional field. 

Each one of the Foundation's ships were accounted for and no sparkle was left over, now that 
the little spy who claimed to be a neutral had been picked up. For a while, that outside ship had 
created a stir in the captain's quarters. The tactics might have needed changing on short notice. 
As it was- 

"Are you sure you have it?" he asked. 

Commander Cenn nodded. "I will take my squadron through hyperspace: radius, 10.00 
parsecs; theta, 268.52 degrees; phi, 84.15 degrees. Return to origin at 1330. Total absence 
11.83 hours." 

"Right. Now we are going to count on pin-point return as regards both space and time. 
Understand?" 

"Yes, captain." He looked at his wrist watch, "My ships will be ready by 0140." 

"Good," said Captain Dixyl. 

The Kalganian squadron was not within detector range now, but they would be soon. There 
was independent information to that effect. Without Cenn's squadron the Foundation forces 
would be badly outnumbered, but the captain was quite confident. Quite confident. 

Preem Palver looked sadly about him. First at the tall, skinny admiral; then at the others, 
everyone in uniform; and now at this last one, big and stout, with his collar open and no tie - 
not like the rest - who said he wanted to speak to him. 

Jole Turbor was saying: "I am perfectly aware, admiral, of the serious possibilities involved 



here, but I tell you that if I can be allowed to speak to him for a few minutes, I may be able to 
settle the current uncertainty." 

"Is there any reason why you can't question him before me?" 

Turbor pursed his lips and looked stubborn. "Admiral," he said, "while I have been attached to 
your ships, the Third Fleet has received an excellent press. You may station men outside the 
door, if you like, and you may return in five minutes. But, meanwhile, humor me a bit, and your 
public relations will not suffer. Do you understand me?" 

He did. 

Then Turbor in the isolation that followed, turned to Palver, and said, "Quickly - what is the 
name of the girl you abducted." 

And Palver could simply stare round-eyed, and shake his head. 

"No nonsense," said Turbor. "If you do not answer, you will be a spy and spies are blasted 
without trial in war time." 

"Arcadia Darell!" gasped Palver. 

"Well! All right, then. Is she safe?" 

Palver nodded. 

"You had better be sure of that, or it won't be well for you." 

"She is in good health, perfectly safe," said Palver, palely. 

The admiral returned, "Well?" 

"The man, sir, is not a spy. You may believe what he tells you. I vouch for him." 

"That so?" The admiral frowned. "Then he represents an agricultural co-operative on Trantor 
that wants to make a trade treaty with Terminus for the delivery of grains and potatoes. Well, all 
right, but he can't leave now." 

"Why not?" asked Palver, quickly. 

"Because we're in the middle of a battle. After it is over - assuming we're still alive - we'll take 
you to Terminus." 

The Kalganian fleet that spanned through space detected the Foundation ships from an 
incredible distance and were themselves detected. Like little fireflies in each other's Grand 
Detectors, they closed in across the emptiness. 

And the Foundation's admiral frowned and said, "This must be their main push. Look at the 
numbers." Then, "They won't stand up before us, though; not if Cenn's detachment can be 
counted on." 


Commander Cenn had left hours before - at the first detection of the coming enemy. There was 
no way of altering the plan now. It worked or it didn't, but the admiral felt quite comfortable. As 



did the officers. As did the men. 

Again watch the fireflies. 

Like a deadly ballet dance, in precise formations, they sparked. 

The Foundation fleet edged slowly backwards. Hours passed and the fleet veered slowly off, 
teasing the advancing enemy slightly off course, then more so. 

In the minds of the dictators of the battle plan, there was a certain volume of space that must 
be occupied by the Kalganian ships. Out from that volume crept the Foundationers; into it 
slipped the Kalganians. Those that passed out again were attacked, suddenly and fiercely. 
Those that stayed within were not touched. 

It all depended on the reluctance of the ships of Lord Stettin to take the initiative themselves - 
on their willingness to remain where none attacked. 

Captain Dixyl stared frigidly at his wrist watch. It was 1310, "We've got twenty minutes," he 
said. 

The lieutenant at his side nodded tensely, "It looks all right so far, captain. We've got more than 
ninety percent of them boxed. If we can keep them that way-" 

"Yes! If-" 

The Foundation ships were drifting forward again - very slowly. Not quick enough to urge a 
Kalganian retreat and just quickly enough to discourage a Kalganian advance. They preferred 
to wait. 

And the minutes passed. 

At 1325, the admiral's buzzer sounded in seventy-five ships of the Foundation's line, and they 
built up to a maximum acceleration towards the front-plane of the Kalganian fleet, itself three 
hundred strong. Kalganian shields flared into action, and the vast energy beams flicked out. 
Every one of the three hundred concentrated in the same direction, towards their mad attackers 
who bore down relentlessly, uncaringly and- 

At 1330, fifty ships under Commander Cenn appeared from nowhere, in one single bound 
through hyperspace to a calculated spot at a calculated time - and were spaced in tearing fury 
at the unprepared Kalganian rear. 

The trap worked perfectly. 

The Kalganians still had numbers on their side, but they were in no mood to count. Their first 
effort was to escape and the formation once broken was only the more vulnerable, as the 
enemy ships bumbled into one another's path. 

After a while, it took on the proportions of a rat hunt. 

Of three hundred Kalganian ships, the core and pride of their fleet, some sixty or less, many in 
a state of near-hopeless disrepair, reached Kalgan once more. The Foundation loss was eight 



ships out of a total of one hundred twenty-five. 

Preem Palver landed on Terminus at the height of the celebration. He found the furore 
distracting, but before he left the planet, he had accomplished two things, and received one 
request. 

The two things accomplished were: 1) the conclusion of an agreement whereby Palver's 
co-operative was to deliver twenty shiploads of certain foodstuffs per month for the next year at 
a war price, without, thanks to the recent battle, a corresponding war risk, and 2) the transfer to 
Dr. Darell of Arcadia's five short words. 

For a startled moment, Darell had stared wide-eyed at him, and then he had made his request. 
It was to carry an answer back to Arcadia. Palver liked it; it was a simple answer and made 
sense. It was: "Come back now. There won't be any danger." 

Lord Stettin was in raging frustration. To watch his every weapon break in his hands; to feel the 
firm fabric of his military might part like the rotten thread it suddenly turned out to be - would 
have turned phlegmaticism itself into flowing lava. And yet he was helpless, and knew it. 

He hadn't really slept well in weeks. He hadn't shaved in three days. He had canceled all 
audiences. His admirals were left to themselves and none knew better than the Lord of Kalgan 
that very little time and no further defeats need elapse before he would have to contend with 
internal rebellion. 

Lev Meirus, First Minister, was no help. He stood there, calm and indecently old, with his thin, 
nervous finger stroking, as always, the wrinkled line from nose to chin. 

"Well," shouted Stettin at him, "contribute something. We stand here defeated, do you 
understand? Defeated! And why? I don't know why. There you have it. I don't know why. Do 
you know why?" 

"I think so," said Meirus, calmly. 

"Treason!" The word came out softly, and other words followed as softly. "You've known of 
treason, and you've kept quiet. You served the fool I ejected from the First Citizenship and you 
think you can serve whatever foul rat replaces me. If you have acted so, I will extract your 
entrails for it and burn them before your living eyes." 

Meirus was unmoved. "I have tried to fill you with my own doubts, not once, but many times. I 
have dinned it in your ears and you have preferred the advice of others because it stuffed your 
ego better. Matters have turned out not as I feared, but even worse. If you do not care to listen 
now, say so, sir, and I shall leave, and, in due course, deal with your successor, whose first act, 
no doubt, will be to sign a treaty of peace." 

Stettin stared at him red-eyed, enormous fists slowly clenching and unclenching. "Speak, you 
gray slug. Speak!" 

"I have told you often, sir, that you are not the Mule. You may control ships and guns but you 
cannot control the minds of your subjects. Are you aware, sir, of who it is you are fighting? You 
fight the Foundation, which is never defeated - the Foundation, which is protected by the 



Seldon Plan - the Foundation, which is destined to form a new Empire." 

"There is no Plan. No longer. Munn has said so." 

"Then Munn is wrong. And if he were right, what then? You and I, sir, are not the people. The 
men and women of Kalgan and its subject worlds believe utterly and deeply in the Seldon Plan 
as do all the inhabitants of this end of the Galaxy. Nearly four hundred years of history teach 
the fact that the Foundation cannot be beaten. Neither the kingdoms nor the warlords nor the 
old Galactic Empire itself could do it." 

"The Mule did it." 

"Exactly, and he was beyond calculation - and you are not. What is worse, the people know 
that you are not. So your ships go into battle fearing defeat in some unknown way. The 
insubstantial fabric of the Plan hangs over them so that they are cautious and look before they 
attack and wonder a little too much. While on the other side, that same insubstantial fabric fills 
the enemy with confidence, removes fear, maintains morale in the face of early defeats. Why 
not? The Foundation has always been defeated at first and has always won in the end. 

"And your own morale, sir? You stand everywhere on enemy territory. Your own dominions 
have not been invaded; are still not in danger of invasion - yet you are defeated. You don't 
believe in the possibility, even, of victory, because you know there is none. 

"Stoop, then, or you will be beaten to your knees. Stoop voluntarily, and you may save a 
remnant. You have depended on metal and power and they have sustained you as far as they 
could. You have ignored mind and morale and they have failed you. Now, take my advice. You 
have the Foundation man, Homir Munn. Release him. Send him back to Terminus and he will 
carry your peace offers." 

Stettin's teeth ground behind his pale, set lips. But what choice had he? 

On the first day of the new year, Homir Munn left Kalgan again. More than six months had 
passed since he had left Terminus and in the interim, a war had raged and faded. 

He had come alone, but he left escorted. He had come a simple man of private life; he left the 
unappointed but nevertheless, actual, ambassador of peace. 

And what had most changed was his early concern over the Second Foundation. He laughed at 
the thought of that: and pictured in luxuriant detail the final revelation to Dr. Darell, to that 
energetic, young competent, Anthor, to all of them- 

He knew. He, Homir Munn, finally knew the truth. 

20 



"I Know ..." 


The last two months of the Stettinian war did not lag for Homir. In his unusual office as Mediator 
Extraordinary, he found himself the center of interstellar affairs, a role he could not help but find 
pleasing. 

There were no further major battles - a few accidental skirmishes that could scarcely count - 
and the terms of the treaty were hammered out with little necessity for concessions on the part 
of the Foundation. Stettin retained his office, but scarcely anything else. His navy was 
dismantled; his possessions outside the home system itself made autonomous and allowed to 
vote for return to previous status, full independence or confederation within the Foundation, as 
they chose. 

The war was formally ended on an asteroid in Terminus' own stellar system; site of the 
Foundation's oldest naval base. Lev Meirus signed for Kalgan, and Homir was an interested 
spectator. 

Throughout all that period he did not see Dr. Darell, nor any of the others. But it scarcely 
mattered. His news would keep - and, as always, he smiled at the thought. 

Dr. Darell returned to Terminus some weeks after VK day, and that same evening, his house 
served as the meeting place for the five men who, ten months earlier, had laid their first plans. 

They lingered over dinner and then over wine as though hesitating to return again to the old 
subject. 

It was Jole Turbor, who, peering steadily into the purple depths of the wineglass with one eye, 
muttered, rather than said, "Well, Homir, you are a man of affairs now, I see. You handled 
matters well." 

"I?" Munn laughed loudly and joyously. For some reason, he had not stuttered in months. "I 
hadn't a thing to do with it. It was Arcadia. By the by, Darell, how is she? She's coming back 
from Trantor, I heard?" 

"You heard correctly," said Darell, quietly. "Her ship should dock within the week." He looked, 
with veiled eyes, at the others, but there were only confused, amorphous exclamations of 
pleasure. Nothing else. 

Turbor said, "Then it's over, really. Who would have predicted all this ten months ago. Munn's 
been to Kalgan and back. Arcadia's been to Kalgan and Trantor and is coming back. We've had 
a war and won it, by Space. They tell you that the vast sweeps of history can be predicted, but 
doesn't it seem conceivable that all that has just happened, with its absolute confusion to those 
of us who lived through it, couldn't possibly have been predicted." 

"Nonsense," said Anthor, acidly. "What makes you so triumphant, anyway? You talk as though 
we have really won a war, when actually we have won nothing but a petty brawl which has 
served only to distract our minds from the real enemy." 

There was an uncomfortable silence, in which only Homir Munn's slight smile struck a 



discordant note. 


And Anthor struck the arm of his chair with a balled and furyfilled fist, "Yes, I refer to the 
Second Foundation. There is no mention of it and, if I judge correctly, every effort to have no 
thought of it. Is it because this fallacious atmosphere of victory that palls over this world of idiots 
is so attractive that you feel you must participate? Turn somersaults then, handspring your way 
into a wall, pound one another's back and throw confetti out the window. Do whatever you 
please, only get it out of your system - and when you are quite done and you are yourselves 
again, return and let us discuss that problem which exists now precisely as it did ten months 
ago when you sat here with eyes cocked over your shoulders for fear of you knew not what. Do 
you really think that the Mind-masters of the Second Foundation are less to be feared because 
you have beat down a foolish wielder of spaceships." 

Fie paused, red-faced and panting. 

Munn said quietly, "Will you hear me speak now, Anthor? Or do you prefer to continue your role 
as ranting conspirator?" 

"Flave your say, Flomir," said Darell, "but let's all of us refrain from over-picturesqueness of 
language. It's a very good thing in its place, but at present, it bores me." 

Flomir Munn leaned back in his armchair and carefully refilled his glass from the decanter at his 
elbow. 

"I was sent to Kalgan," he said, "to find out what I could from the records contained in the 
Mule's Palace. I spent several months doing so. I seek no credit for that accomplishment. As I 
have indicated, it was Arcadia whose ingenuous intermeddling obtained the entry for me. 
Nevertheless, the fact remains that to my original knowledge of the Mule's life and times, which, 
I submit, was not small, I have added the fruits of much labor among primary evidence which 
has been available to no one else. 

"I am, therefore, in a unique position to estimate the true danger of the Second Foundation; 
much more so than is our excitable friend here." 

"And," grated Anthor, "what is your estimate of that danger?" 

"Why, zero." 

A short pause, and Elvett Semic asked with an air of surprised disbelief, "You mean zero 
danger?" 

"Certainly. Friends, there is no Second Foundation!" 

Anthor's eyelids closed slowly and he sat there, face pale and expressionless. 

Munn continued, attention-centering and loving it, "And what is more, there was never one." 

"On what," asked Darell, "do you base this surprising conclusion?" 

"I deny," said Munn, "that it is surprising. You all know the story of the Mule's search for the 
Second Foundation. But what do you know of the intensity of that search - of the 



single-mindedness of it. He had tremendous resources at his disposal and he spared none of it. 
He was single-minded - and yet he failed. No Second Foundation was found." 

"One could scarcely expect it to be found," pointed out Turbor, restlessly. "It had means of 
protecting itself against inquiring minds." 

"Even when the mind that is inquiring is the Mule's mutant mentality? I think not. But come, you 
do not expect me to give you the gist of fifty volumes of reports in five minutes. All of it, by the 
terms of the peace treaty will be part of the Seldon Historical Museum eventually, and you will 
all be free to be as leisurely in your analysis as I have been. You will find his conclusion plainly 
stated, however, and that I have already expressed. There is not, and has never been, any 
Second Foundation." 

Semic interposed, "Well, what stopped the Mule, then?" 

"Great Galaxy, what do you suppose stopped him? Death did; as it will stop all of us. The 
greatest superstition of the age is that the Mule was somehow stopped in an all-conquering 
career by some mysterious entities superior even to himself. It is the result of looking at 
everything in wrong focus. 

"Certainly no one in the Galaxy can help knowing that the Mule was a freak, physical as well as 
mental. He died in his thirties because his ill-adjusted body could no longer struggle its creaking 
machinery along. For several years before his death he was an invalid. His best health was 
never more than an ordinary man's feebleness. All right, then. He conquered the Galaxy and, in 
the ordinary course of nature, proceeded to die. It's a wonder he proceeded as long and as well 
as he did. Friends, it's down in the very clearest print. You have only to have patience. You 
have only to try to look at all facts in new focus." 

Darell said, thoughtfully, "Good, let us try that Munn. It would be an interesting attempt and, if 
nothing else, would help oil our thoughts. These tampered men - the records of which Anthor 
brought to us nearly a year ago, what of them? Help us to see them in focus." 

"Easily. How old a science is encephalographic analysis? Or, put it another way, how 
well-developed is the study of neuronic pathways." 

"We are at the beginning in this respect. Granted," said Darell. 

"Right. How certain can we be then as to the interpretation of what I've heard Anthor and 
yourself call the Tamper Plateau. You have your theories, but how certain can you be. Certain 
enough to consider it a firm basis for the existence of a mighty force for which all other 
evidence is negative? It's always easy to explain the unknown by postulating a superhuman 
and arbitrary will. 

"It's a very human phenomenon. There have been cases all through Galactic history where 
isolated planetary systems have reverted to savagery, and what have we learned there? In 
every case, such savages attribute the to-them-incomprehensible forces of Nature - storms, 
pestilences, droughts - to sentient beings more powerful and more arbitrary than men. 

"It is called anthropomorphism, I believe, and in this respect, we are savages and indulge in it. 
Knowing little of mental science, we blame anything we don't know on supermen - those of the 



Second Foundation in this case, based on the hint thrown us by Seldon." 

"Oh," broke in Anthor, "then you do remember Seldon. I thought you had forgotten. Seldon did 
say there was a Second Foundation. Get that in focus. 

"And are you aware then of all Seldon's purposes. Do you know what necessities were involved 
in his calculations? The Second Foundation may have been a very necessary scarecrow, with 
a highly specific end in view. Flow did we defeat Kalgan, for instance? What were you saying in 
your last series of articles, Turbor?" 

Turbor stirred his bulk. "Yes, I see what "You're driving at. I was on Kalgan towards the end, 
Darell, and it was quite obvious that morale on the planet was incredibly bad. I looked through 
their news-records and - well, they expected to be beaten. Actually, they were completely 
unmanned by the thought that eventually the Second Foundation would take a hand, on the 
side of the First, naturally." 

"Quite right," said Munn. "I was there all through the war. I told Stettin there was no Second 
Foundation and he believed me. He felt safe. But there was no way of making the people 
suddenly disbelieve what they had believed all their lives, so that the myth eventually served a 
very useful purpose in Seldon's cosmic chess game." 

But Anthor's eyes opened, quite suddenly, and fixed themselves sardonically on Munn's 
countenance. "I say you lie. " 

Flomir turned pale, "I don't see that I have to accept, much less answer, an accusation of that 
nature." 

"I say it without any intention of personal offense. You cannot help lying; you don't realize that 
you are. But you lie just the same." 

Semic laid his withered hand on the young man's sleeve. "Take a breath, young fella." 

Anthor shook him off, none too gently, and said, "I'm out of patience with all of you. I haven't 
seen this man more than half a dozen times in my life, yet I find the change in him 
unbelievable. The rest of you have known him for years, yet pass it by. It is enough to drive one 
mad. Do you call this man you've been listening to Flomir Munn? Fie is not the Flomir Munn / 
knew." 

A medley of shock; above which Munn's voice cried, "You claim me to be an impostor?" 

"Perhaps not in the ordinary sense," shouted Anthor above the din, "but an impostor 
nonetheless. Quiet, everyone! I demand to be heard." 

Fie frowned them ferociously into obedience. "Do any of you remember Flomir Munn as I do - 
the introverted librarian who never talked without obvious embarrassment; the man of tense 
and nervous voice, who stuttered out his uncertain sentences? Does this man sound like him? 
Fle's fluent, he's confident, he's fun of theories, and, by Space, he doesn't stutter. Is he the 
same person?" 


Even Munn looked confused, and Pelleas Anthor drove on. "Well, shall we test him? 



How?" asked Darell. 


"You ask how? There is the obvious way. You have his encephalographic record of ten months 
ago, haven't you? Run one again, and compare." 

He pointed at the frowning librarian, and said violently, "I dare him to refuse to subject himself 
to analysis." 

"I don't object," said Munn, defiantly. "I am the man I always was." 

"Can you know?" said Anthor with contempt. "I’ll go further. I trust no one here. I want everyone 
to undergo analysis. There has been a war. Munn has been on Kalgan; Turbor has been on 
board ship and all over the war areas. Darell and Semic have been absent, too - I have no idea 
where. Only I have remained here in seclusion and safety, and I no longer trust any of the rest 
of you. And to play fair, I’ll submit to testing as well. Are we agreed then? Or do I leave now and 
go my own way?" 

Turbor shrugged and said, "I have no objection." 

"I have already said I don't," said Munn. 

Semic moved a hand in silent assent, and Anthor waited for Darell. Finally, Darell nodded his 
head. 

"Take me first," said Anthor. 

The needles traced their delicate way across the cross-hatchings as the young neurologist sat 
frozen in the reclining seat, with lidded eyes brooding heavily. From the files, Darell removed 
the folder containing Anthor's old encephalographic record. He showed them to Anthor. 

"That's your own signature, isn't it?" 

"Yes, yes. It's my record. Make the comparison." 

The scanner threw old and new on to the screen. All six curves in each recording were there, 
and in the darkness, Munn's voice sounded in harsh clarity. "Well, now, look there. There's a 
change." 

"Those are the primary waves of the frontal lobe. It doesn't mean a thing, Homir. Those 
additional jags you're pointing to are just anger. It's the others that count." 

He touched a control knob and the six pairs melted into one another and coincided. The deeper 
amplitude of primaries alone introduced doubling. 

"Satisfied?" asked Anthor. 

Darell nodded curtly and took the seat himself. Semic followed him and Turbor followed him. 
Silently the curves were collected; silently they were compared. 

Munn was the last to take his seat. For a moment, he hesitated, then, with a touch of 
desperation in his voice, he said, "Well now, look, I'm coming in last and I'm under tension. I 
expect due allowance to be made for that." 



"There will be," Darell assured him. "No conscious emotion of yours will affect more than the 
primaries and they are not important." 

It might have been hours, in the utter silence that followed 

And then in the darkness of the comparison, Anthor said huskily: "Sure, sure, it's only the onset 
of a complex. Isn't that what he told us? No such thing as tampering; it's all a silly 
anthropomorphic notion - but look at it! A coincidence I suppose." 

"What's the matter?" shrieked Munn. 

Darell's hand was tight on the librarian's shoulder. "Quiet, Munn - you've been handled; you've 
been adjusted by them." 

Then the light went on, and Munn was looking about him with broken eyes, making a horrible 
attempt to smile. 

"You can't be serious, surely. There is a purpose to this. You're testing me." 

But Darell only shook his head. "No, no, Homir. It's true." 

The librarian's eyes were filled with tears, suddenly. "I don't feel any different. I can't believe it." 
With sudden conviction: "You are all in this. It's a conspiracy." 

Darell attempted a soothing gesture, and his hand was struck aside. Munn snarled, "You're 
planning to kill me. By Space, you're planning to kill me." 

With a lunge, Anthor was upon him. There was the sharp crack of bone against bone, and 
Homir was limp and flaccid with that look of fear frozen on his face. 

Anthor rose shakily, and said, "We'd better tie and gag him. Later, we can decide what to do." 
He brushed his long hair back. 

Turbor said, "How did you guess there was something wrong with him?" 

Anthor turned sardonically upon him. "It wasn't difficult. You see, / happen to know where the 
Second Foundation really is. " 

Successive shocks have a decreasing effect- 

It was with actual mildness that Semic asked, "Are you sure? I mean we’ve just gone through 
this sort of business with Munn-" 

This isn't quite the same," returned Anthor. "Darell, the day the war started, I spoke to you most 
seriously. I tried to have you leave Terminus. I would have told you then what I will tell you now, 
if I had been able to trust you." 

"You mean you have known the answer for half a year?" smiled Darell. 

"I have known it from the time I learned that Arcadia had left for Trantor." 

And Darell started to his feet in sudden consternation. "What had Arcadia to do with it? What 



are you implying?" 

"Absolutely nothing that is not plain on the face of all the events we know so well. Arcadia goes 
to Kalgan and flees in terror to the very center of the Galaxy, rather than return home. 
Lieutenant Dirige, our best agent on Kalgan is tampered with. Homir Munn goes to Kalgan and 
he is tampered with. The Mule conquered the Galaxy, but, queerly enough, he made Kalgan his 
headquarters, and it occurs to me to wonder if he was conqueror or, perhaps, tool. At every 
turn, we meet with Kalgan, Kalgan - nothing but Kalgan, the world that somehow survived 
untouched all the struggles of the warlords for over a century." 

"Your conclusion, then." 

"Is obvious," Anthor's eyes were intense. "The Second Foundation is on Kalgan." 

Turbor interrupted. "I was on Kalgan, Anthor. I was there last week. If there was any Second 
Foundation on it, I'm mad. Personally, I think you're mad." 

The young man whirled on him savagely. "Then you're a fat fool. What do you expect the 
Second Foundation to be? A grammar school? Do you think that Radiant Fields in tight beams 
spell out ‘Second Foundation' in green and purple along the incoming spaceship routes? Listen 
to me, Turbor. Wherever they are, they form a tight oligarchy. They must be as well hidden on 
the world on which they exist, as the world itself is in the Galaxy as a whole." 

Turbor's jaw muscles writhed. "I don't like your attitude, Anthor." 

"That certainly disturbs me," was the sarcastic response. "Take a look about you here on 
Terminus. We’re at the center - the core - the origin of the First Foundation with all its 
knowledge of physical science. Well, how many of the population are physical scientists? Can 
you operate an Energy Transmitting Station? What do you know of the operation of a 
hyperatomic motor? Eh? The number of real scientists on Terminus - even on Terminus - can 
be numbered at less than one percent of the population. 

"And what then of the Second Foundation where secrecy must be preserved. There will still be 
less of the cognoscenti, and these will be hidden even from their own world." 

"Say," said Semic, carefully. "We just licked Kalgan-" 

"So we did. So we did," said Anthor, sardonically. "Oh, we celebrate that victory. The cities are 
still illuminated; they are still shooting off fireworks; they are still shouting over the televisors. 

But now, now, when the search is on once more for the Second Foundation, where is the last 
place well look; where is the last place anyone will look? Right!" Kalgan! 

"We haven't hurt them, you know; not really. We've destroyed some ships, killed a few 
thousands, torn away their Empire, taken over some of their commercial and economic power - 
but that all means nothing. I'll wager that not one member of the real ruling class of Kalgan is in 
the least discomfited. On the contrary, they are now safe from curiosity. But not from my 
curiosity. What do you say, Darell?" 

Darell shrugged his shoulders. "Interesting. I’m trying to fit it in with a message I received from 
Arcadia a few months since." 



"Oh, a message?" asked Anthor. "And what was it?" 

"Well, I'm not certain. Five short words. But its interesting." 

"Look," broke in Semic, with a worried interest, "there's something / don't understand." 

"What's that?" 

Semic chose his words carefully, his old upper lip lifting with each word as if to let them out 
singly and reluctantly. "Well, now, Homir Munn was saying just a while ago that Hari Seldon 
was faking when he said that he had established a Second Foundation. Now you're saying that 
it's not so; that Seldon wasn't faking, eh?" 

"Right, he wasn't faking. Seldon said he had established a Second Foundation and so he had." 

"All right, then, but he said something else, too. Fie said he established the two Foundations at 
opposite ends of the Galaxy. Now, young man, was that a. fake - because Kalgan isn't at the 
opposite end of the Galaxy." 

Anthor seemed annoyed, "That's a minor point. That part may well have been a cover up to 
protect them. But after all, think- What real use would it serve to have the Mind-masters at the 
opposite end of the Galaxy? What is their function? To help preserve the Plan. Who are the 
main card players of the Plan? We, the First Foundation. Where can they best observe us, 
then, and serve their own ends? At the opposite end of the Galaxy? Ridiculous! They're within 
fifty parsecs, actually, which is much more sensible." 

"I like that argument," said Darell. "It makes sense. Look here, Munn's been conscious for some 
time and I propose we loose him. Fie can't do any harm, really." 

Anthor looked rebellious, but Flomir was nodding vigorously. Five seconds later he was rubbing 
his wrists just as vigorously. 

"Flow do you feel?" asked Darell. 

"Rotten," said Munn, sulkily, "but never mind. There's something I want to ask this bright young 
thing here. I've heard what he's had to say, and I’d just like permission to wonder what we do 
next." 

There was a queer and incongruous silence. 

Munn smiled bitterly. "Well, suppose Kalgan is the Second Foundation. Who on Kalgan are 
they? Flow are you going to find them? Flow are you going to tackle them if you find them, eh?" 

"Ah," said Darell, "I can answer that, strangely enough. Shall I tell you what Semic and I have 
been doing this past half-year? It may give you another reason, Anthor, why I was anxious to 
remain on Terminus all this time." 

"In the first place," he went on, "I've been working on encephalographic analysis with more 
purpose than any of you may suspect. Detecting Second Foundation minds is a little more 
subtle than simply finding a Tamper Plateau - and I did not actually succeed. But I came close 
enough. 



"Do you know, any of you, how emotional control works? It's been a popular subject with fiction 
writers since the time of the Mule and much nonsense has been written, spoken, and recorded 
about it. For the most part, it has been treated as something mysterious and occult. Of course, 
it isn't. That the brain is the source of a myriad, tiny electromagnetic fields, everyone knows. 
Every fleeting emotion varies those fields in more or less intricate fashion, and everyone should 
know that, too. 

"Now it is possible to conceive a mind which can sense these changing fields and even 
resonate with them. That is, a special organ of the cerebrum can exist which can take on 
whatever field-pattern it may detect. Exactly how it would do this, I have no idea, but that 
doesn't matter, if I were blind, for instance, I could still learn the significance of photons and 
energy quanta and it could be reasonable to me that the absorption of a photon of such energy 
could create chemical changes in some organ of the body such that its presence would be 
detectable. But, of course, I would not be able, thereby, to understand color. 

"Do all of you follow?" 

There was a firm nod from Anthor; a doubtful nod from the others. 

"Such a hypothetical Mind Resonating Organ, by adjusting itself to the Fields emitted by other 
minds could perform what is popularly known as 'reading emotion’ or even 'reading minds,’ 
which is actually something even more subtle. It is but an easy step from that to imagining a 
similar organ which could actually force an adjustment on another mind. It could orient with its 
stronger Field the weaker one of another mind - much as a strong magnet will orient the atomic 
dipoles in a bar of steel and leave it magnetized thereafter. 

"I solved the mathematics of Second Foundationism in the sense that I evolved a function that 
would predict the necessary combination of neuronic paths that would allow for the formation of 
an organ such as I have just described - but, unfortunately, the function is too complicated to 
solve by any of the mathematical tools at present known. That is too bad, because it means 
that I can never detect a Mind-worker by his encephalographic pattern alone. 

"But I could do something else. I could, with Semic's help, construct what I shall describe as a 
Mental Static device. It is not beyond the ability of modem science to create an energy source 
that will duplicate an encephalograph-type pattern of electromagnetic field. Moreover, it can be 
made to shift at complete random, creating, as far as this particular mind-sense is concerned, a 
sort of 'noise' or 'static' which masks other minds with which it may be in contact. 

"Do you still follow?" 

Semic chuckled. Fie had helped create blindly, but he had guessed, and guessed correctly. The 
old man had a trick or two left— 

Anthor said, "I think I do." 

"The device," continued Darell, "is a fairly easy one to produce, and I had all the resources of 
the Foundation under my control as it came under the heading of war research. And now the 
mayor's offices and the Legislative assemblies are surrounded with Mental Static. So are most 
of our key factories. So is this building. Eventually, any place we wish can be made absolutely 



safe from the Second Foundation or from any future Mule. And that's it." 

He ended quite simply with a flat-palmed gesture of the hand. 

Turbor seemed stunned. "Then it's all over. Great Seldon, it's all over." 

"Well," said Darell, "not exactly." 

"How, not exactly? Is there something more?" 

"Yes, we haven't located the Second Foundation yet!" 

"What," roared Anthor, "are you trying to say-" 

"Yes, I am. Kalgan is not the Second Foundation." 

"How do you know?" 

"It's easy," grunted Darell. "You see / happen to know where the Second Foundation really is. " 

21 

The Answer That Satisfied 

Turbor laughed suddenly - laughed in huge, windy gusts that bounced ringingly off the walls 
and died in gasps. He shook his head, weakly, and said, "Great Galaxy, this goes on all night. 
One after another, we put up our straw men to be knocked down. We have fun, but we don't get 
anywhere. Space! Maybe all planets are the Second Foundation. Maybe they have no planet, 
just key men spread on all the planets. And what does it matter, since Darell says we have the 
perfect defense?" 

Darell smiled without humor. "The perfect defense is not enough, Turbor. Even my Mental 
Static device is only something that keeps us in the same place. We cannot remain forever with 
our fists doubled, frantically staring in all directions for the unknown enemy. We must know not 
only how to win, but whom to defeat. And there is a specific world on which the enemy exists." 

"Get to the point," said Anthor, wearily. "What's your information?" 

"Arcadia," said Darell, "sent me a message, and until I got it, I never saw the obvious. I 
probably would never have seen the obvious. Yet it was a simple message that went: 'A circle 
has no end.’ Do you see?" 

"No," said Anthor, stubbornly, and he spoke, quite obviously, for the others. 

"A circle has no end," repeated Munn, thoughtfully, and his forehead furrowed. 

"Well," said Darell, impatiently, "it was clear to me- What is the one absolute fact we know 
about the Second Foundation, eh? I'll tell you! We know that Hari Seldon located it at the 
opposite end of the Galaxy. Homir Munn theorized that Seldon lied about the existence of the 
Foundation. Pelleas Anthor theorized that Seldon had told the truth that far, but lied about the 



location of the Foundation. But I tell you that Hari Seldon lied in no particular; that he told the 
absolute truth. 


"But, what is the other end? The Galaxy is a flat, lens-shaped object. A cross section along the 
flatness of it is a circle, and a circle had no end - as Arcadia realized. We - we, the First 
Foundation - are located on Terminus at the rim of that circle. We are at an end of the Galaxy, 
by definition. Now follow the rim of that circle and find the other end. Follow it, follow it, follow it, 
and you will find no other end. You will merely come back to your starting point- 

"And there you will find the Second Foundation." 

"There?" repeated Anthor. "Do you mean here?" 

"Yes, I mean here!" cried Darell, energetically. "Why, where else could it possibly be? You said 
yourself that if the Second Foundationers were the guardians of the Seldon Plan, it was unlikely 
that they could be located at the so-called other end of the Galaxy, where they would be as 
isolated as they could conceivably be. You thought that fifty parsecs distance was more 
sensible. I tell you that that is also too far. That no distance at all is more sensible. And where 
would they be safest? Who would look for them here? Oh, it's the old principle of the most 
obvious place being the least suspicious. 

"Why was poor Ebling Mis so surprised and unmanned by his discovery of the location of the 
Second Foundation? There he was, looking for it desperately in order to warn it of the coming 
of the Mule, only to find that the Mule had already captured both Foundations at a stroke. And 
why did the Mule himself fail, in his search? Why not? If one is searching for an unconquerable 
menace, one would scarcely look among the enemies already conquered. So the 
Mind-masters, in their own leisurely time, could lay their plans to stop the Mule, and succeeded 
in stopping him. 

"Oh, it is maddeningly simple. For here we are with our plots and our schemes, thinking that we 
are keeping our secrecy - when all the time we are in the very heart and core of our enemy's 
stronghold. It's humorous." 

Anthor did not remove the skepticism from his face, "You honestly believe this theory, Dr. 
Darell?" 

"I honestly believe it." 

"Then any of our neighbors, any man we pass in the street might be a Second Foundation 
superman, with his mind watching yours and feeling the pulse of its thoughts." 

"Exactly." 

"And we have been permitted to proceed all this time, without molestation?" 

"Without molestation? Who told you we were not molested? You, yourself, showed that Munn 
has been tampered with. What makes you think that we sent him to Kalgan in the first place 
entirely of our own volition - or that Arcadia overheard us and followed him on her own volition? 
Hah ! We have been molested without pause, probably. And after all, why should they do more 
than they have? It is far more to their benefit to mislead us, than merely to stop us." 



Anthor buried himself in meditation and emerged therefrom with a dissatisfied expression. 

"Well, then, I don't like it. Your Mental Static isn't worth a thought. We can't stay in the house 
forever and as soon as we leave, we're lost, with what we now think we know. Unless you can 
build a little machine for every inhabitant in the Galaxy." 

"Yes, but we're not quite helpless, Anthor. These men of the Second Foundation have a special 
sense which we lack. It is their strength and also their weakness. For instance, is there any 
weapon of attack that will be effective against a normal, sighted man which is useless against a 
blind man?" 

"Sure," said Munn, promptly. "A light in the eyes." 

"Exactly," said Darell. "A good, strong blinding light." 

"Well, what of it?" asked Turbor. 

"But the analogy is clear. I have a Mind Static device. It sets up an artificial electromagnetic 
pattern, which to the mind of a man of the Second Foundation would be like a beam of light to 
us. But the Mind Static device is kaleidoscopic. It shifts quickly and continuously, faster than the 
receiving mind can follow. All right then, consider it a flickering light; the kind that would give 
you a headache, if continued long enough. Now intensify that light or that electromagnetic field 
until it is blinding - and it will become a pain, an unendurable pain. But only to those with the 
proper sense; not to the unsensed." 

"Really?" said Anthor, with the beginnings of enthusiasm. "Flave you tried this?" 

"On whom? Of course, I haven't tried it. But it will work." 

"Well, where do you have the controls for the Field that surrounds the house? Id like to see this 
thing." 

"Flere." Darell reached into his jacket pocket. It was a small thing, scarcely bulging his pocket. 
Fie tossed the black, knob-studded cylinder to the other. 

Anthor inspected it carefully and shrugged his shoulders. "It doesn't make me any smarter to 
look at it. Look Darell, what mustn't I touch? I don't want to turn off the house defense by 
accident, you know." 

"You won't," said Darell, indifferently. "That control is locked in place." Fie flicked at a toggle 
switch that didn't move. 

"And what's this knob?" 

"That one varies rate of shift of pattern. Flere - this one varies the intensity. It's that which I've 
been referring to." 

"May I-" asked Anthor, with his finger on the intensity knob. The others were crowding close. 
"Why not?" shrugged Darell. "It won't affect us." 

Slowly, almost wincingly, Anthor turned the knob, first in one direction, then in another. Turbor 



was gritting his teeth, while Munn blinked his eyes rapidly. It was as though they were keening 
their inadequate sensory equipment to locate this impulse which could not affect them. 

Finally, Anthor shrugged and tossed the control box back into Darell's lap. "Well, I suppose we 
can take your word for it. But it's certainly hard to imagine that anything was happening when I 
turned the knob." 

"But naturally, Pelleas Anthor," said Darell, with a tight smile. "The one I gave you was a 
dummy. You see I have another." He tossed his jacket aside and seized a duplicate of the 
control box that Anthor had been investigating, which swung from his belt. 

"You see," said Darell, and in one gesture turned the intensity knob to maximum. 

And with an unearthly shriek, Pelleas Anthor sank to the floor. He rolled in his agony; whitened, 
gripping fingers clutching and tearing futilely at his hair. 

Munn lifted his feet hastily to prevent contact with the squirming body, and his eyes were twin 
depths of horror. Semic and Turbor were a pair of plaster casts; stiff and white. 

Darell, somber, turned the knob back once more. And Anthor twitched feebly once or twice and 
lay still. He was alive, his breath racking his body. 

"Lift him on to the couch," said Darell, grasping the young man's head. "Help me here." 

Turbor reached for the feet. They might have been lifting a sack of flour. Then, after long 
minutes, the breathing grew quieter, and Anthor's eyelids fluttered and lifted. His face was a 
horrid yellow; his hair and body was soaked in perspiration, and his voice, when he spoke, was 
cracked and unrecognizable. 

"Don't," he muttered, "don't! Don't do that again! You don't know- You don't know- Oh-h-h." It 
was a long, trembling moan. 

"We won't do it again," said Darell, "if you will tell us the truth. You are a member of the Second 
Foundation?" 

"Let me have some water," pleaded Anthor. 

"Get some, Turbor," said Darell, "and bring the whiskey bottle." 

He repeated the question after pouring a jigger of whiskey and two glasses of water into 
Anthor. Something seemed to relax in the young man- 

"Yes," he said, wearily. "I am a member of the Second Foundation." 

"Which," continued Darell, "is located on Terminus - here?" 

"Yes, yes. You are right in every particular, Dr. Darell." 

"Good! Now explain what's been happening this past half year. Tell us!" 

"I would like to sleep," whispered Anthor. 

"Later! Speak now!" 



A tremulous sigh. Then words, low and hurried. The others bent over him to catch the sound, 
"The situation was growing dangerous. We knew that Terminus and its physical scientists were 
becoming interested in brain-wave patterns and that the times were ripe for the development of 
something like the Mind Static device. And there was growing enmity toward the Second 
Foundation. We had to stop it without ruining Seldon's Plan. 

"We ... we tried to control the movement. We tried to join it. It would turn suspicion and efforts 
away from us. We saw to it that Kalgan declared war as a further distraction. That's why I sent 
Munn to Kalgan. Stettin's supposed mistress was one of us. She saw to it that Munn made the 
proper moves-" 

"Callia is-" cried Munn, but Darell waved him silent. 

Anthor continued, unaware of any interruption, "Arcadia followed. We hadn't counted on that - 
can't foresee everything - so Callia maneuvered her to Trantor to prevent interference. That's 
all. Except that we lost." 

"You tried to get me to go to Trantor, didn't you?" asked Darell. 

Anthor nodded, "Had to get you out of the way. The growing triumph in your mind was clear 
enough. You were solving the problems of the Mind Static device." 

"Why didn't you put me under control?" 

"Couldn't ... couldn't. Had my orders. We were working according to a Plan. If I improvised, I 
would have thrown everything off. Plan only predicts probabilities ... you know that ... like 
Seldon's Plan." He was talking in anguished pants, and almost incoherently. His head twisted 
from side to side in a restless fever. "We worked with individuals ... not groups ... very low 
probabilities involved ... lost out. Besides ... if control you ... someone else invent device ... no 
use ... had to control times ... more subtle ... First Speaker's own plan ... don't know all angles 
... except ... didn't work a-a-a-" He ran down. 

Darell shook him roughly, "You can't sleep yet. How many of you are there?" 

"Huh? Whatjasay ... oh ... not many ... be surprised fifty ... don't need more." 

"All here on Terminus?" 

"Five ... six out in Space ... like Callia ... got to sleep." 

He stirred himself suddenly as though to one giant effort, and his expressions gained in clarity. 
It was a last attempt at self-justification, at moderating his defeat. 

"Almost got you at the end. Would have turned off defenses and seized you. Would have seen 
who was master. But you gave me dummy controls ... suspected me all along-" 

And finally he was asleep. 

Turbor said, in awed tones, "How long did you suspect him, Darell?" 

"Ever since he first came here," was the quiet response. "He came from Kleise, he said. But I 



knew Kleise; and I knew on what terms we parted. He was a fanatic on the subject of the 
Second Foundation and I had deserted him. My own purposes were reasonable, since I 
thought it best and safest to pursue my own notions by myself. But I couldn't tell Kleise that; 
and he wouldn't have listened if I had. To him, I was a coward and a traitor, perhaps even an 
agent of the Second Foundation. He was an unforgiving man and from that time almost to the 
day of his death he had no dealings with me. Then, suddenly, in his last few weeks of life, he 
writes me - as an old friend - to greet his best and most promising pupil as a co-worker and 
begin again the old investigation. 

"It was out of character. How could he possibly do such a thing without being under outside 
influence, and I began to wonder if the only purpose might not be to introduce into my 
confidence a real agent of the Second Foundation. Well, it was so-" 

He sighed and closed his own eyes for a moment. 

Semic put in hesitantly, "What will we do with all of them ... these Second Foundation fellas?" 

"I don't know," said Darell, sadly. "We could exile them, I suppose. There's Zoranel, for 
instance. They can be placed there and the planet saturated with Mind Static. The sexes can 
be separated, or, better still, they can be sterilized - and in fifty years, the Second Foundation 
will be a thing of the past. Or perhaps a quiet death for all of them would be kinder." 

"Do you suppose," said Turbor, "we could learn the use of this sense of theirs. Or are they born 
with it, like the Mule." 

"I don't know. I think it is developed through long training, since there are indications from 
encephalography that the potentialities of it are latent in the human mind. But what do you want 
that sense for? It hasn't helped them." 

He frowned. 

Though he said nothing, his thoughts were shouting. 

It had been too easy - too easy. They had fallen, these invincibles, fallen like book-villains, and 
he didn't like it. 

Galaxy! When can a man know he is not a puppet? How can a man know he is not a puppet? 

Arcadia was coming home, and his thoughts shuddered away from that which he must face in 
the end. 

She was home for a week, then two, and he could not loose the tight check upon those 
thoughts. How could he? She had changed from child to young woman in her absence, by 
some strange alchemy. She was his link to life; his fink to a bittersweet marriage that scarcely 
outlasted his honeymoon. 

And then, late one evening, he said as casually as he could, "Arcadia, what made you decide 
that Terminus contained both Foundations?" 


They had been to the theater; in the best seats with private trimensional viewers for each; her 
dress was new for the occasion, and she was happy. 



She stared at him for a moment, then tossed it off. "Oh, I Don't know, Father. It just came to 
me." 

A layer of ice thickened about Dr. Darell's heart. 

"Think," he said, intensely. "This is important. What made you decide both Foundations were 
on Terminus." 

She frowned slightly. "Well, there was Lady Callia. I knew she was a Second Foundationer. 
Anthor said so, too." 

"But she was on Kalgan," insisted Darell. "What made you decide on Terminus?" 

And now Arcadia waited for several minutes before she answered. What had made her decide? 
What had made her decide? 

She had the horrible sensation of something slipping just beyond her grasp. 

She said, "She knew about things - Lady Callia did - and must have had her information from 
Terminus. Doesn't that sound right, Father? 

But he just shook his head at her. 

"Father," she cried, "I knew. The more I thought, the surer I was. It just made sense." 

There was that lost look in her father's eyes, "It's no good, Arcadia. Its no good. Intuition is 
suspicious when concerned with the Second Foundation. You see that, don't you? It might have 
been intuition - and it might have been control!" 

"Control! You mean they changed me? Oh, no. No, they couldn't." She was backing away from 
him. "But didn't Anthor say I was right? Fie admitted it. He admitted everything. And you've 
found the whole bunch right here on Trantor. Didn't you? Didn't you?" She was breathing 
quickly. 

"I know, but- Arcadia, will you let me make an encephalographic analysis of your brain?' 

She shook her head violently, "No, no! I'm too scared." 

"Of me, Arcadia? There's nothing to be afraid of. But we must know. You see that, don't you?" 

She interrupted him only once, after that. She clutched at his arm just before the last switch 
was thrown. "What if I am different, Father? What will you have to do?" 

"I won't have to do anything, Arcadia. If you're different, well leave. Well go back to Trantor, you 
and I, and ... and we won't care about anything else in the Galaxy." 

Never in Darell's life had an analysis proceeded so slowly, cost him so much, and when it was 
over, Arcadia huddled down and dared not look. Then she heard him laugh and that was 
information enough. She jumped up and threw herself into his opened arms. 

He was babbling wildly as they squeezed one another, "The house is under maximum Mind 
Static and your brain-waves are normal. We really have trapped them, Arcadia, and we can go 



back to living." 

"Father," she gasped, "can we let them give us medals now?" 

"How did you know I’d asked to be left out of it?" He held her at arm's mind; you know 
everything. All right, you can have your medal on a platform, with speeches." 

"And Father?" 

"Yes?" 

"Can you call me Arkady from now on." 

"But- Very well, Arkady." 

Slowly the magnitude of the victory was soaking into him and saturating him. The Foundation - 
the First Foundation - now the only Foundation - was absolute master of the Galaxy. No 
further barrier stood between themselves and the Second Empire - the final fulfillment of 
Seldon's Plan. 

They had only to reach for it- 
Thanks to- 


22 

The Answer That Was True 

An unlocated room on an unlocated world! 

And a man whose plan had worked. 

The First Speaker looked up at the Student, "Fifty men and women," he said. "Fifty martyrs! 
They knew it meant death or permanent imprisonment and they could not even be oriented to 
prevent weakening - since orientation might have been detected. Yet they did not weaken. 
They brought the plan through, because they loved the greater Plan." 

"Might they have been fewer?" asked the Student, doubtfully. 

The First Speaker slowly shook his head, "It was the lower limit. Less could not possibly have 
carried conviction. In fact, pure objectivism would have demanded seventy-five to leave margin 
for error. Never mind. Have you studied the course of action as worked out by the Speakers' 
Council fifteen years ago?" 

"Yes, Speaker." 

"And compared it with actual developments?" 

"Yes, Speaker." Then, after a pause- 
"I was quite amazed, Speaker." 



"I know. There is always amazement. If you knew how many men labored for how many 
months - years, in fact - to bring about the polish of perfection, you would be less amazed. 

Now tell me what happened - in words. I want your translation of the mathematics." 

"Yes, Speaker." The young man marshaled his thoughts. "Essentially, it was necessary for the 
men of the First Foundation to be thoroughly convinced that they had located and destroyed 
the Second Foundation. In that way, there would be reversion to the intended original. To all 
intents, Terminus would once again know nothing about us; include us in none of their 
calculations. We are hidden once more, and safe - at the cost of fifty men." 

"And the purpose of the Kalganian war?" 

"To show the Foundation that they could beat a physical enemy - to wipe out the damage done 
to their self-esteem and self-assuredness by the Mule." 

"There you are insufficient in your analysis. Remember, the population of Terminus regarded us 
with distinct ambivalence. They hated and envied our supposed superiority; yet they relied on 
us implicitly for protection. If we had been 'destroyed' before the Kalganian war, it would have 
meant panic throughout the Foundation. They would then never have had the courage to stand 
up against Stettin, when he then attacked; and he would have. Only in the full flush of victory 
could the 'destruction' have taken place with minimum ill-effects. Even waiting a year, 
thereafter, might have meant a too-great cooling off spirit for success." 

The Student nodded. "I see. Then the course of history will proceed without deviation in the 
direction indicated by the Plan." 

"Unless," pointed out the First Speaker, "further accidents, unforeseen and individual, occur." 

"And for that," said the Student, "we still exist. Except- Except- One facet of the present state 
of affairs worries me, Speaker. The First Foundation is left with the Mind Static device - a 
powerful weapon against us. That, at least, is not as it was before." 

"A good point. But they have no one to use it against. It has become a sterile device; just as 
without the spur of our own menace against them, encephalographic analysis will become a 
sterile science. Other varieties of knowledge will once again bring more important and 
immediate returns. So this first generation of mental scientists among the First Foundation will 
also be the last - and, in a century, Mind Static will be a nearly forgotten item of the past." 

"Well-" The Student was calculating mentally. "I suppose you're right." 

But what I want you most to realize, young man, for the sake of your future in the Council is the 
consideration given to the tiny intermeshings that were forced into our plan of the last decade 
and a half simply because we dealt with individuals. There was the manner in which Anthor had 
to create suspicion against himself in such a way that it would mature at the right time, but that 
was relatively simple. 

"There was the manner in which the atmosphere was so manipulated that to no one on 
Terminus would it occur, prematurely, that Terminus itself might be the center they were 
seeking. That knowledge had to be supplied to the young girl, Arcadia, who would be heeded 



by no one but her own father. She had to be sent to Trantor, thereafter, to make certain that 
there would be no premature contact with her father. Those two were the two poles of a 
hyperatomic motor; each being inactive without the other. And the switch had to be thrown - 
contact had to be made - at just the right moment. I saw to that! 

"And the final battle had to be handled properly. The Foundation's fleet had to be soaked in 
self-confidence, while the fleet of Kalgan made ready to run. I saw to that, also!" 

Said the Student, "It seems to me, Speaker, that you ... I mean, all of us ... were counting on 
Dr. Darell not suspecting that Arcadia was our tool. According to my check on the calculations, 
there was something like a thirty percent probability that he would so suspect. What would have 
happened then?" 

"We had taken care of that. What have you been taught about Tamper Plateaus? What are 
they? Certainly not evidence of the introduction of an emotional bias. That can be done without 
any chance of possible detection by the most refined conceivable encephalographic analysis. A 
consequence of Leffert's Theorem, you know. It is the removal, the cutting-out, of previous 
emotional bias, that shows. It must show. 

"And, of course, Anthor made certain that Darell knew all about Tamper Plateaus. 

"However- When can an individual be placed under Control without showing it? Where there is 
no previous emotional bias to remove. In other words, when the individual is a new-born infant 
with a blank slate of a mind. Arcadia Darell was such an infant here on Trantor fifteen years 
ago, when the first line was drawn into the structure of the plan. She will never know that she 
has been Controlled, and will be all the better for it, since her Control involved the development 
of a precocious and intelligent personality." 

The First Speaker laughed shortly, "In a sense, it is the irony of it all that is most amazing. For 
four hundred years, so many men have been blinded by Seldon's words 'the other end of the 
Galaxy.' They have brought their own peculiar, physical-science thought to the problem, 
measuring off the other end with protractors and rulers, ending up eventually either at a point in 
the periphery one hundred eighty degrees around the rim of the Galaxy, or back at the original 
point. 

"Yet our very greatest danger lay in the fact that there was a possible solution based on 
physical modes of thought. The Galaxy, you know, is not simply a flat ovoid of any sort; nor is 
the periphery a closed curve. Actually, it is a double spiral, with at least eighty percent of the 
inhabited planets on the Main Arm. Terminus is the extreme outer end of the spiral arm, and we 
are at the other - since, what is the opposite end of a spiral? Why, the center. 

"But that is trifling. It is an accidental and irrelevant solution. The solution could have been 
reached immediately, if the questioners had but remembered that Hari Seldon was a social 
scientist not a physical scientist and adjusted their thought processes accordingly. What could 
'opposite ends’ mean to a social scientist? Opposite ends on the map? Of course not. That's 
the mechanical interpretation only. 

"The First Foundation was at the periphery, where the original Empire was weakest, where its 
civilizing influence was least, where its wealth and culture were most nearly absent. And where 



is the social opposite end of the Galaxy? Why, at the place where the original Empire was 
strongest, where its civilizing influence was most, where its wealth and culture were most 
strongly present. 

"Here! At the center! At Trantor, capital of the Empire of Seldon's time. 

"And it is so inevitable. Hari Seldon left the Second Foundation behind him to maintain, 
improve, and extend his work That has been known, or guessed at, for fifty years. But where 
could that best be done? At Trantor, where Seldon's group had worked, and where the data of 
decades had been accumulated. And it was the purpose of the Second Foundation to protect 
the Plan against enemies. That, too, was known! And where was the source of greatest danger 
to Terminus and the Plan? 

"Here! Here at Trantor, where the Empire dying though it was, could, for three centuries, still 
destroy the Foundation, if it could only have decided to do so. 

"Then when Trantor fell and was sacked and utterly destroyed, a short century ago, we were 
naturally able to protect our headquarters, and, on all the planet, the Imperial Library and the 
grounds about it remained untouched. This was well-known to the Galaxy, but even that 
apparently overwhelming hint passed them by. 

"It was here at Trantor that Ebling Mis discovered us; and here that we saw to it that he did not 
survive the discovery. To do so, it was necessary to arrange to have a normal Foundation girl 
defeat the tremendous mutant powers of the Mule. Surely, such a phenomenon might have 
attracted suspicion to the planet on which it happened- It was here that we first studied the 
Mule and planned his ultimate defeat. It was here that Arcadia was born and the train of events 
begun that led to the great return to the Seldon Plan. 

"And all those flaws in our secrecy; those gaping holes; remained unnoticed because Seldon 
had spoken of 'the other end’ in his way, and they had interpreted it in their way." 

The First Speaker had long since stopped speaking to the Student. It was an exposition to 
himself, really, as he stood before the window, looking up at the incredible blaze of the 
firmament, at the huge Galaxy that was now safe forever. 

"Hari Seldon called Trantor, 'Star's End,’" he whispered, "and why not that bit of poetic imagery. 
All the universe was once guided from this rock; all the apron strings of the stars led here. 'All 
roads lead to Trantor,' says the old proverb, 'and that is where all stars end.'" 

Ten months earlier, the First Speaker had viewed those same crowding stars - nowhere as 
crowded as at the center of that huge cluster of matter Man calls the Galaxy - with misgivings; 
but now there was a somber satisfaction on the round and ruddy face of Preem Palver - First 
Speaker. 