doing, Mallow? The crew's grumbling, the officers are worried, and Iâ€™m wondering-" 

"Wondering? About what?" 

"About the situation. And about you. What are we doing?" 

"Waiting." 

The old trader snorted and grew red. He growled, "You're going it blind, Mallow. There's a 
guard around the field and there are ships overhead. Suppose they're getting ready to blow us 
into a hole in the ground." 

"They've had a week." 



"Maybe they're waiting for reinforcements." Twer's eyes were sharp and hard. 

Mallow sat down abruptly, "Yes, I'd thought of that You see, it poses a pretty problem. First, we 
got here without trouble. That may mean nothing, however, for only three ships out of better 
than three hundred went a-glimmer last year. The percentage is low. But that may mean also 
that the number of their ships equipped with nuclear power is small, and that they dare not 
expose them needlessly, until that number grows. 

"But it could mean, on the other hand, that they haven't nuclear power after all. Or maybe they 
have and are keeping undercover, for fear we know something. It's one thing, after all, to 
piratize blundering, light-armed merchant ships. It's another to fool around with an accredited 
envoy of the Foundation when the mere fact of his presence may mean the Foundation is 
growing suspicious. 

"Combine this-" 

"Flold on, Mallow, hold on." Twer raised his hands. "You're just about drowning me with talk. 
What're you getting at? Never mind the in-betweens." 

"You've got to have the in-betweens, or you won't understand, Twer. We're both waiting. They 
don't know what I'm doing here and I don't know what they've got here. But I'm in the weaker 
position because I'm one and they're an entire world - maybe with atomic power. I can't afford 
to be the one to weaken. Sure it's dangerous. Sure there may be a hole in the ground waiting 
for us. But we knew that from the start. What else is there to do?" 

"I don't- Who's that, now?" 

Mallow looked up patiently, and tuned the receiver. The visiplate glowed into the craggy face of 
the watch sergeant. 

"Speak, sergeant." 

The sergeant said, "Pardon, sir. The men have given entry to a Foundation missionary." 

"A what?' Mallow's face grew livid. 

"A missionary, sit. Fle's in need of hospitalization, sir-" 

"There'll be more than one in need of that, sergeant, for this piece of work. Order the men to 
battle stations." 

Crew's lounge was almost empty. Five minutes after the order, even the men on the off-shift 
were at their guns. It was speed that was the great virtue in the anarchic regions of the 
interstellar space of the Periphery, and it was in speed above all that the crew of a master 
trader excelled. 

Mallow entered slowly, and stared the missionary up and down and around. His eye slid to 
Lieutenant Tinter, who shifted uneasily to one side and to Watch-Sergeant Demen, whose 
blank face and stolid figure flanked the other. 

The Master Trader turned to Twer and paused thoughtfully, "Well, then, Twer, get the officers 



here quietly, except for the co-ordinators and the trajectorian. The men are to remain at stations 
till further orders." 

There was a five-minute hiatus, in which Mallow kicked open the doors to the lavatories, looked 
behind the bar, pulled the draperies across the thick windows. For half a minute he left the 
room altogether, and when he returned he was humming abstractedly. 

Men filed in. Twer followed, and closed the door silently. 

Mallow said quietly, "First, who let this man in without orders from me?" 

The watch sergeant stepped forward. Every eye shifted. "Pardon, sir. It was no definite person. 
It was a sort of mutual agreement. Fie was one of us, you might say, and these foreigners 
here-" 

Mallow cut him short, "I sympathize with your feelings, sergeant, and understand them. These 
men, were they under your command?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"When this is over, they're to be confined to individual quarters for a week. You yourself are 
relieved of all supervisory duties for a similar period. Understood?" 

The sergeant's face never changed, but there was the slightest droop to his shoulders. Fie said, 
crisply, "Yes, sir." 

"You may leave. Get to your gun-station." 

The door closed behind him and the babble rose. 

Twer broke in, "Why the punishment, Mallow? You know that these Korellians kill captured 
missionaries." 

"An action against my orders is bad in itself whatever other reasons there may be in its favor. 

No one was to leave or enter the ship without permission." 

Lieutenant Tinter murmured rebelliously, "Seven days without action. You can't maintain 
discipline that way." 

Mallow said icily, "/can. There's no merit in discipline under ideal circumstances. I'll have it in 
the face of death, or it's useless. Where's this missionary? Get him here in front of me." 

The trader sat down, while the scarlet-cloaked figure was carefully brought forward. 

"What's your name, reverend?" 

"Eh?" The scarlet-robed figure wheeled towards Mallow, the whole body turning as a unit. FHis 
eyes were blankly open and there was a bruise on one temple. Fie had not spoken, nor, as far 
as Mallow could tell, moved during all the previous interval. 

"Your name, revered one?" 

The missionary started to sudden feverish life. FHis arms went out in an embracing gesture. "My 



son - my children. May you always be in the protecting arms of the Galactic Spirit." 

Twer stepped forward, eyes troubled, voice husky, "The man's sick. Take him to bed, 
somebody. Order him to bed, Mallow, and have him seen to. He's badly hurt." 

Mallow's great arm shoved him back, "Don't interfere, Twer, or I'll have you out of the room. 
Your name, revered one?" 

The missionary's hands clasped in sudden supplication, "As you are enlightened men, save me 
from the heathen." The words tumbled out, "Save me from these brutes and darkened ones 
who raven after me and would afflict the Galactic Spirit with their crimes. I am Jord Parma, of 
the Anacreonian worlds. Educated at the Foundation; the Foundation itself, my children. I am a 
Priest of the Spirit educated into all the mysteries, who have come here where the inner voice 
called me." He was gasping. "I have suffered at the hands of the unenlightened. As you are 
Children of the Spirit; and in the name of that Spirit, protect me from them." 

A voice broke in upon them, as the emergency alarm box clamored metallically: 

"Enemy units in sight! Instruction desired!" 

Every eye shot mechanically upward to the speaker. 

Mallow swore violently. He clicked open the reverse and yelled, "Maintain vigil! That is all!" and 
turned it off. 

He made his way to the thick drapes that rustled aside at a touch and stared grimly out, 

Enemy units! Several thousands of them in the persons of the individual members of a 
Korellian mob. The rolling rabble encompassed the port from extreme end to extreme end, and 
in the cold, hard light of magnesium flares the foremost straggled closer. 

"Tinter!" The trader never turned, but the back of his neck was red. "Get the outer speaker 
working and find out what they want. Ask if they have a representative of the law with them. 
Make no promises and no threats, or I'll kill you." 

Tinter turned and left. 

Mallow felt a rough hand on his shoulder and he struck it aside. It was Twer. His voice was an 
angry hiss in his ear, "Mallow, you're bound to hold onto this man. There's no way of 
maintaining decency and honor otherwise. He's of the Foundation and, after all, he - is a priest. 
These savages outside- Do you hear me?" 

"I hear you, Twer." Mallow's voice was incisive. "I've got more to do here than guard 
missionaries. I'll do, sir, what I please, and, by Seldon and all the Galaxy, if you try to stop me, 
I'll tear out your stinking windpipe. Don't get in my way, Twer, or it will be the last of you." 

He turned and strode past. "You! Revered Parma! Did you know that, by convention, no 
Foundation missionaries may enter the Korellian territory?" 

The missionary was trembling, "I can but go where the Spirit leads, my son. If the darkened 
ones refuse enlightenment, is it not the greater sign of their need for it?" 



"That's outside the question, revered one. You are here against the law of both Korell and the 
Foundation. I cannot in law protect you." 

The missionary's hands were raised again. His earlier bewilderment was gone. There was the 
raucous clamor of the ship's outer communication system in action, and the faint, undulating 
gabble of the angry horde in response. The sound made his eyes wild. 

"You hear them? Why do you talk of law to me, of a law made by men? There are higher laws. 
Was it not the Galactic Spirit that said: Thou shalt not stand idly by to the hurl of thy fellowman. 
And has he not said: Even as thou dealest with the humble and defenseless, thus shalt thou be 
dealt with. 

"Have you not guns? Have you not a ship? And behind you is there not the Foundation? And 
above and all-about you is there not the Spirit that rules the universe?" He paused for breath. 

And then the great outer voice of the Far Star ceased and Lieutenant Tinter was back, troubled. 

"Speak!" said Mallow, shortly. 

"Sir, they demand the person of Jord Parma." 

"If not?" 

"There are various threats, sir. It is difficult to make much out. There are so many - and they 
seem quite mad. There is someone who says he governs the district and has police powers, 
but he is quite evidently not his own master." 

"Master or not," shrugged Mallow, "he is the law. Tell them that if this governor, or policeman, 
or whatever he is, approaches the ship alone, he can have the Revered Jord Parma." 

And there was suddenly a gun in his hand. He added, "I don't know what insubordination is. I 
have never had any experience with it. But if there's anyone here who thinks he can teach me, 
I'd like to teach him my antidote in return." 

The gun swiveled slowly, and rested on Twer. With an effort, the old trader's face untwisted and 
his hands unclenched and lowered. His breath was a harsh rasp in his nostrils. 

Tinter left, and in five minutes a puny figure detached itself from the crowd. It approached 
slowly and hesitantly, plainly drenched in fear and apprehension. Twice it turned back, and 
twice the patently obvious threats of the many-headed monster urged him on. 

"All right," Mallow gestured with the hand-blaster, which remained unsheathed. "Grun and 
Upshur, take him out." 

The missionary screeched. He raised his arms and rigid fingers speared upward as the 
voluminous sleeves fell away to reveal the thin, veined arms. There was a momentary, tiny 
flash of light that came and went in a breath. Mallow blinked and gestured again, 
contemptuously. 

The missionary's voice poured out as he struggled in the two-fold grasp, "Cursed be the traitor 
who abandons his fellowman to evil and to death. Deafened be the ears that are deaf to the 



pleadings of the helpless. Blind be the eyes that are blind to innocence. Blackened forever be 
the soul that consorts with blackness-" 

Twer clamped his hands tightly over his ears. 

Mallow flipped his blaster and put it away. "Disperse," he said, evenly, "to respective stations. 
Maintain full vigil for six hours after dispersion of crowd. Double stations for forty-eight hours 
thereafter. Further instructions at that time. Twer, come with me." 

They were alone in Mallow's private quarters. Mallow indicated a chair and Twer sat down. His 
stocky figure looked shrunken. 

Mallow stared him down, sardonically. "Twer," he said, "I'm disappointed. Your three years in 
politics seem to have gotten you out of trader habits. Remember, I may be a democrat back at 
the Foundation, but there's nothing short of tyranny that can run my ship the way I want it run. I 
never had to pull a blaster on my men before, and I wouldn't have had to now, if you hadn't 
gone out of line. 

"Twer, you have no official position, but you're here on my invitation, and I'll extend you every 
courtesy - in private. However, from now on, in the presence of my officers or men, I'm 'sir,' 
and not 'Mallow.' And when I give an order, you'll jump faster than a third-class recruit just for 
luck, or I'll have you handcuffed in the sub-level even faster. Understand?" 

The party-leader swallowed dryly. He said, reluctantly, "My apologies." 

"Accepted! Will you shake?" 

Twer's limp fingers were swallowed in Mallow's huge palm. Twer said, "My motives were good. 
It's difficult to send a man out to be lynched. That wobbly-kneed governor or whatever-he-was 
can't save him. It's murder." 

"I can't help that. Frankly, the incident smelled too bad. Didn't you notice?" 

"Notice what?" 

"This spaceport is deep in the middle of a sleepy far section. Suddenly a missionary escapes. 
Where from? He comes here. Coincidence? A huge crowd gathers. From where? The nearest 
city of any size must be at least a hundred miles away. But they arrive in half an hour. How?" 

"How?" echoed Twer. 

"Well, what if the missionary were brought here and released as bait. Our friend, Revered 
Parma, was considerably confused. He seemed at no time to be in complete possession of his 
wits." 

"Hard usage-" murmured Twer bitterly. 

"Maybe! And maybe the idea was to have us go all chivalrous and gallant, into a stupid defense 
of the man. He was here against the laws of Korell and the Foundation. If I withhold him, it is an 
act of war against Korell, and the Foundation would have no legal right to defend us." 

"That - that's pretty far-fetched." 



The speaker blared and forestalled Mallow's answer: "Sir, official communication received." 
"Submit immediately!" 

The gleaming cylinder arrived in its slot with a click. Mallow opened it and shook out the 
silver-impregnated sheet it held. He rubbed it appreciatively between thumb and finger and 
said, "Teleported direct from the capital. Commdor's own stationery." 

He read it in a glance and laughed shortly, "So my idea was far-fetched, was it?" 

He tossed it to Twer, and added, "Half an hour after we hand back the missionary, we finally 
get a very polite invitation to the Commdor's august presence - after seven days of previous 
waiting. / think we passed a test." 


5 . 

Commdor Asper was a man of the people, by self-acclamation. His remaining back-fringe of 
gray hair drooped limply to his shoulders, his shirt needed laundering, and he spoke with a 
snuffle. 

"There is no ostentation here, Trader Mallow," he said. "No false show. In me, you see merely 
the first citizen of the state. That's what Commdor means, and that's the only title I have." 

He seemed inordinately pleased with it all, "in fact, I consider that fact one of the strongest 
bonds between Korell and your nation. I understand you people enjoy the republican blessings 
we do." 

"Exactly, Commdor," said Mallow gravely, taking mental exception to the comparison, "an 
argument which I consider strongly in favor of continued peace and friendship between our 
governments." 

"Peace! Ah!" The Commdor's sparse gray beard twitched to the sentimental grimaces of his 
face. "I don't think there is anyone in the Periphery who has so near his heart the ideal of 
Peace, as I have. I can truthfully say that since I succeeded my illustrious father to the 
leadership of the state, the reign of Peace has never been broken. Perhaps I shouldn't say it" 
-he coughed gently- "but I have been told that my people, my fellow-citizens rather, know me 
as Asper, the Well-Beloved." 

Mallow's eyes wandered over the well-kept garden. Perhaps the tall men and the 
strangely-designed but openly-vicious weapons they carried just happened to be lurking in odd 
comers as a precaution against himself. That would be understandable. But the lofty, 
steel-girdered walls that circled the place had quite obviously been recently strengthened - an 
unfitting occupation for such a Well-Beloved Asper. 

He said, "It is fortunate that I have you to deal with then, Commdor. The despots and monarchs 
of surrounding worlds, which haven't the benefit of enlightened administration, often lack the 
qualities that would make a ruler well-beloved." 


Such as?" There was a cautious note in the Commdor's voice. 



"Such as a concern for the best interests of their people, You, on the other hand, would 
understand," 

The Commdor kept his eyes on the gravel path as they walked leisurely, His hands caressed 
each other behind his back. 

Mallow went on smoothly, "Up to now, trade between our two nations has suffered because of 
the restrictions placed upon our traders by your government. Surely, it has long been evident to 
you that unlimited trade-" 

"Free Trade!" mumbled the Commdor. 

"Free Trade, then. You must see that it would be of benefit to both of us. There are things you 
have that we want, and things we have that you want. It asks only an exchange to bring 
increased prosperity. An enlightened ruler such as yourself, a friend of the people - I might say, 
a member of the people - needs no elaboration on that theme. I won't insult your intelligence by 
offering any." 

"True! I have seen this. But what would you?" His voice was a plaintive whine. "Your people 
have always been so unreasonable. I am in favor of all the trade our economy can support, but 
not on your terms. I am not sole master here." His voice rose, "I am only the servant of public 
opinion. My people will not take commerce which carries with it a compulsory religion." 

Mallow drew himself up, "A compulsory religion?" 

"So it has always been in effect. Surely you remember the case of Askone twenty years ago. 
First they were sold some of your goods and then your people asked for complete freedom of 
missionary effort in order that the goods might be run properly; that Temples of Health be set 
up. There was then the establishment of religious schools; autonomous rights for all officers of 
the religion and with what result? Askone is now an integral member of the Foundation's 
system and the Grand Master cannot call his underwear his own. Oh, no! Oh, no! The dignity of 
an independent people could never suffer it." 

"None of what you speak is at all what I suggest," interposed Mallow. 

"No?" 

"No. I'm a Master Trader. Money is my religion. All this mysticism and hocus-pocus of the 
missionaries annoy me, and I'm glad you refuse to countenance it. It makes you more my type 
of man." 

The Commdor's laugh was high-pitched and jerky, "Well said! The Foundation should have 
sent a man of your caliber before this." 

He laid a friendly hand upon the trader's bulking shoulder, "But man, you have told me only 
half. You have told me what the catch is not. Now tell me what it is" 

"The only catch, Commdor, is that you're going to be burdened with an immense quantity of 
riches." 



"Indeed?" he snuffled. "But what could I want with riches? The true wealth is the love of one's 
people. I have that." 

"You can have both, for it is possible to gather gold with one hand and love with the other." 

"Now that, my young man, would be an interesting phenomenon, if it were possible. How would 
you go about it?" 

"Oh, in a number of ways. The difficulty is choosing among them. Let's see. Well, luxury items, 
for instance. This object here, now-" 

Mallow drew gently out of an inner pocket a flat, linked chain of polished metal. "This, for 
instance." 

"What is it?" 

"That's got to be demonstrated. Can you get a woman? Any young female will do. And a mirror, 
full length." 

"Hm-m-m. Let's get indoors, then." 

The Commdor referred to his dwelling place as a house. The populace undoubtedly would call 
it a palace. To Mallow's straightforward eyes, it looked uncommonly like a fortress, it was built 
on an eminence that overlooked the capital. Its walls were thick and reinforced. Its approaches 
were guarded, and its architecture was shaped for defense. Just the type of dwelling, Mallow 
thought sourly, for Asper, the Well-Beloved. 

A young girl was before them. She bent low to the Commdor, who said, "This is one of the 
Commdora's girls. Will she do?" 

"Perfectly!" 

The Commdor watched carefully while Mallow snapped the chain about the girl's waist, and 
stepped back. 

The Commdor snuffled, "Well. Is that all?" 

"Will you draw the curtain, Commdor. Young lady, there's a little knob just near the snap. Will 
you move it upward, please? Go ahead, it won't hurt you." 

The girl did so, drew a sharp breath, looked at her hands, and gasped, "Oh!" 

From her waist as a source she was drowned in a pale, streaming luminescence of shifting 
color that drew itself over her head in a flashing coronet of liquid fire. It was as if someone had 
tom the aurora borealis out of the sky and molded it into a cloak. 

The girl stepped to the mirror and stared, fascinated. 

"Here, take this." Mallow handed her a necklace of dull pebbles. "Put it around your neck." 

The girl did so, and each pebble, as it entered the luminescent field became an individual flame 
that leaped and sparkled in crimson and gold. 



"What do you think of it?" Mallow asked her. The girl didn't answer but there was adoration in 
her eyes. The Commdor gestured and reluctantly, she pushed the knob down, and the glory 
died. She left - with a memory. 

"It's yours, Commdor," said Mallow, "for the Commdora. Consider it a small gift from the 
Foundation." 

"Hm-m-m.' The Commdor turned the belt and necklace over in his hand as though calculating 
the weight. "How is it done?" 

Mallow shrugged, "That's a question for our technical experts. But it will work for you without - 
mark you, without- priestly help." 

"Well, it's only feminine frippery after all. What could you do with it? Where would the money 
come in?" 

"You have balls, receptions, banquets - that sort of thing?" 

"Oh, yes." 

"Do you realize what women will pay for that sort of jewelry? Ten thousand credits, at least." 
The Commdor seemed struck in a heap, "Ah!" 

"And since the power unit of this particular item will not last longer than six months, there will be 
the necessity of frequent replacements. Now we can sell as many of these as you want for the 
equivalent in wrought iron of one thousand credits. There's nine hundred percent profit for you." 

The Commdor plucked at his beard and seemed engaged in awesome mental calculations, 
"Galaxy, how they would fight for them. I'll keep the supply small and let them bid. Of course, it 
wouldn't do to let them know that I personally-" 

Mallow said, "We can explain the workings of dummy corporations, if you would like. -Then, 
working further at random, take our complete line of household gadgets. We have collapsible 
stoves that will roast the toughest meats to the desired tenderness in two minutes. We've got 
knives that won't require sharpening. We've got the equivalent of a complete laundry that can 
be packed in a small closet and will work entirely automatically. Ditto dish-washers. Ditto-ditto 
floor-scrubbers, furniture polishers, dust-precipitators, lighting fixtures - oh, anything you like. 
Think of your increased popularity, if you make them available to the public. Think of your 
increased quantity of, uh, worldly goods, if they're available as a government monopoly at nine 
hundred percent profit. It will be worth many times the money to them, and they needn't know 
what you pay for it. And, mind you, none of it will require priestly supervision. Everybody will be 
happy." 

"Except you, it seems. What do you get out of it?" 

"Just what every trader gets by Foundation law. My men and I will collect half of whatever 
profits we take in. Just you buy all I want to sell you, and we'll both make out quite well. Quite 
well." 


The Commdor was enjoying his thoughts, "What did you say you wanted to be paid with? Iron? 



"That, and coal, and bauxite. Also tobacco, pepper, magnesium, hardwood. Nothing you 
haven't got enough of." 

"It sounds well." 

"I think so. Oh, and still another item at random, Commdor. I could retool your factories." 

"Eh? How's that?" 

"Well, take your steel foundries. I have handy little gadgets that could do tricks with steel that 
would cut production costs to one percent of previous marks. You could cut prices by half, and 
still split extremely fat profits with the manufacturers. I tell you, I could show you exactly what I 
mean, if you allowed me a demonstration. Do you have a steel foundry in this city? It wouldn't 
take long." 

"It could be arranged, Trader Mallow. But tomorrow, tomorrow. Would you dine with us 
tonight?" 

"My men-" began Mallow. 

"Let them all come," said the Commdor, expansively. "A symbolic friendly union of our nations. 
It will give us a chance for further friendly discussion. But one thing," his face lengthened and 
grew stem, "none of your religion. Don't think that all this is an entering wedge for the 
missionaries." 

"Commdor," said Mallow, dryly, "I give you my word that religion would cut my profits." 

"Then that will do for now. You'll be escorted back to your ship." 


6 . 

The Commdora was much younger than her husband. Her face was pale and coldly formed 
and her black hair was drawn smoothly and tightly back. 

Her voice was tart. "You are quite finished, my gracious and noble husband? Quite, quite 
finished? I suppose I may even enter the garden if I wish, now." 

"There is no need for dramatics, Licia, my dear," said the Commdor, mildly. "The young man 
will attend at dinner tonight, and you can speak with him all you wish and even amuse yourself 
by listening to all I say. Room will have to be arranged for his men somewhere about the place. 
The stars grant that they be few in numbers." 

"Most likely they'll be great hogs of eaters who will eat meat by the quarter-animal and wine by 
the hogshead. And you will groan for two nights when you calculate the expense." 

"Well now, perhaps I won't. Despite your opinion, the dinner is to be on the most lavish scale." 

"Oh, I see." She stared at him contemptuously. "You are very friendly with these barbarians. 
Perhaps that is why I was not to be permitted to attend your conversation. Perhaps your little 



weazened soul is plotting to turn against my father." 

"Not at all." 

"Yes, I'd be likely to believe you, wouldn't I? If ever a poor woman was sacrificed for policy to 
an unsavory marriage, it was myself. I could have picked a more proper man from the alleys 
and mudheaps of my native world." 

"Well, now, I'll tell you what, my lady. Perhaps you would enjoy returning to your native world. 
Except that, to retain as a souvenir that portion of you with which I am best acquainted, I could 
have your tongue cut out first. And," he tolled his head, calculatingly, to one side, "as a final 
improving touch to your beauty, your ears and the tip of your nose as well." 

"You wouldn't dare, you little pug-dog. My father would pulverize your toy nation to meteoric 
dust. In fact, he might do it in any case, if I told him you were treating with these barbarians." 

"Hm-m-m. Well, there's no need for threats. You are free to question the man yourself tonight. 
Meanwhile, madam, keep your wagging tongue still." 

"At your orders?" 

"Here, take this, then, and keep still." 

The band was about her waist and the necklace around her neck. He pushed the knob himself 
and stepped back. 

The Commdora drew in her breath and held out her hands stiffly. She fingered the necklace 
gingerly, and gasped again. 

The Commdor rubbed his hands with satisfaction and said, "You may wear it tonight - and I'll 
get you more. Now keep still." 

The Commdora kept still. 


7 . 

Jaim Twer fidgeted and shuffled his feet. He said, "What's twisting yoi/rface?" 

Hober Mallow lifted out of his brooding, "Is my face twisted? It's not meant so." 

"Something must have happened yesterday, -I mean, besides that feast." With sudden 
conviction, "Mallow, there's trouble, isn't there?" 

"Trouble? No. Quite the opposite. In fact, I'm in the position of throwing my full weight against a 
door and finding it ajar at the time. We're getting into this steel foundry too easily." 

"You suspect a trap?" 

"Oh, for Seldon's sake, don't be melodramatic." Mallow swallowed his impatience and added 
conversationally, "It's just that the easy entrance means there will be nothing to see. 



"Nuclear power, huh?" Twer ruminated. "I'll tell you. There's just about no evidence of any 
nuclear power economy here in Korell. And it would be pretty hard to mask all signs of the 
widespread effects a fundamental technology such as nucleics would have on everything." 

"Not if it was just starting up, Twer, and being applied to a war economy. You'd find it in the 
shipyards and the steel foundries only." 

"So if we don't find it, then-" 

"Then they haven't got it - or they're not showing it. Toss a coin or take a guess." 

Twer shook his head, "I wish I'd been with you yesterday." 

"I wish you had, too," said Mallow stonily. "I have no objection to moral support. Unfortunately, 
it was the Commdor who set the terms of the meeting, and not myself. And what is coming now 
would seem to be the royal groundcar to escort us to the foundry. Have you got the gadgets?" 


"All of them." 


8 . 

The foundry was large, and bore the odor of decay which no amount of superficial repairs could 
quite erase. It was empty now and in quite an unnatural state of quiet, as it played 
unaccustomed host to the Commdor and his court. 

Mallow had swung the steel sheet onto the two supports with a careless heave. He had taken 
the instrument held out to him by Twer and was gripping the leather handle inside its leaden 
sheath. 

"The instrument," he said, "is dangerous, but so is a buzz saw. You just have to keep your 
fingers away." 

And as he spoke, he drew the muzzle-slit swiftly down the length of the steel sheet, which 
quietly and instantly fell in two. 

There was a unanimous jump, and Mallow laughed. He picked up one of the halves and 
propped it against his knee, "You can adjust the cutting-length accurately to a hundredth of an 
inch, and a two-inch sheet will slit down the middle as easily as this thing did. If you've got the 
thickness exactly judged, you can place steel on a wooden table, and split the metal without 
scratching the wood." 

And at each phrase, the nuclear shear moved and a gouged chunk of steel flew across the 
room. 

"That," he said, "is whittling - with steel." 

He passed back the shear. "Or else you have the plane. Do you want to decrease the thickness 
of a sheet, smooth out an irregularity, remove corrosion? Watch!" 



Thin, transparent foil flew off the other half of the original sheet in six-inch swarths, then 
eight-inch, then twelve. 

"Or drills? It's all the same principle." 

They were crowded around now. It might have been a sleight-of-hand show, a comer magician, 
a vaudeville act made into high-pressure salesmanship. Commdor Asper fingered scraps of 
steel. High officials of the government tiptoed over each other's shoulders, and whispered, 
while Mallow punched clean, beautiful round holes through an inch of hard steel at every touch 
of his nuclear drill. 

"Just one more demonstration. Bring two short lengths of pipe, somebody." 

An Honorable Chamberlain of something-or-other sprang to obedience in the general 
excitement and thought-absorption, and stained his hands like any laborer. 

Mallow stood them upright and shaved the ends off with a single stroke of the shear, and then 
joined the pipes, fresh cut to fresh cut. 

And there was a single pipe! The new ends, with even atomic irregularities missing, formed one 
piece upon joining. 

Then Mallow looked up at his audience, stumbled at his first word and stopped. There was the 
keen stirring of excitement in his chest, and the base of his stomach went tingly and cold. 

The Commdor's own bodyguard, in the confusion, had struggled to the front line, and Mallow, 
for the first time, was near enough to see their unfamiliar hand-weapons in detail. 

They were nuclear! There was no mistaking it; an explosive projectile weapon with a barrel like 
that was impossible. But that wasn't the big point. That wasn't the point at all. 

The butts of those weapons had, deeply etched upon them, in worn gold plating, the 
Spaceship-and-Sun! 

The same Spaceship-and-Sun that was stamped on every, one of the great volumes of the 
original Encyclopedia that the Foundation had begun and not yet finished. The same 
Spaceship-and-Sun that had blazoned the banner of the Galactic Empire through millennia. 

Mallow talked through and around his thoughts, "Test that pipe! It's one piece. Not perfect; 
naturally, the joining shouldn't be done by hand." 

There was no need of further legerdemain. It had gone over. Mallow was through. He had what 
he wanted. There was only one thing in his mind. The golden globe with its conventionalized 
rays, and the oblique cigar shape that was a space vessel. 

The Spaceship-and-Sun of the Empire! 

The Empire! The words drilled! A century and a half had passed but there was still the-Empire, 
somewhere deeper in the Galaxy. And it was emerging again, out into the Periphery. 


Mallow smiled! 



9 . 


The Far Star was two days out in space, when Hober Mallow, in his private quarters with Senior 
Lieutenant Drawt, handed him an envelope, a roll of microfilm, and a silvery spheroid. 

"As of an hour from now, Lieutenant, you're Acting Captain of the Far Star, until I return, -or 
forever." 

Drawt made a motion of standing but Mallow waved him down imperiously. 

"Quiet, and listen. The envelope contains the exact location of the planet to which you're to 
proceed. There you will wait for me for two months. If, before the two months are up, the 
Foundation locates you, the microfilm is my report of the trip. 

"If, however," and his voice was somber, "I do not return at the end of two months, and 
Foundation vessels do not locate you, proceed to the planet, Terminus, and hand in the Time 
Capsule as the report. Do you understand that?" 

"Yes, sir." 

"At no time are you, or any of the men, to amplify in any single instance, my official report." 

"If we are questioned, sir?" 

"Then you know nothing." 

"Yes, sir." 

The interview ended, and fifty minutes later, a lifeboat kicked lightly off the side of the Far Star. 


10 . 

Onum Barr was an old man, too old to be afraid. Since the last disturbances, he had lived alone 
on the fringes of the land with what books he had saved from the ruins. Fie had nothing he 
feared losing, least of all the worn remnant of his life, and so he faced the intruder without 
cringing. 

"Your door was open," the stranger explained. 

His accent was clipped and harsh, and Barr did not fail to notice the strange blue-steel 
hand-weapon at his hip. In the half gloom of the small room, Barr saw the glow of a force-shield 
surrounding the man. 

He said, wearily, "There is no reason to keep it closed. Do you wish anything of me?" 

"Yes." The stranger remained standing in the center of the room. He was large, both in height 
and bulk. "Yours is the only house about here." 

"It is a desolate place," agreed Barr, "but there is a town to the east. I can show you the way'." 



"In awhile. May I sit?" 

"If the chairs will hold you," said the old man, gravely. They were old, too. Relics of a better 
youth. 

The stranger said, "My name is Hober Mallow. I come from a far province." 

Barr nodded and smiled, "Your tongue convicted you of that long ago. I am Onum Barr of 
Siwenna - and once Patrician of the Empire." 

"Then this is Siwenna. I had only old maps to guide me." 

"They would have to be old, indeed, for star-positions to be misplaced." 

Barr sat quite still, while the other's eyes drifted away into a reverie. He noticed that the nuclear 
force-shield had vanished from about the man and admitted dryly to himself that his person no 
longer seemed formidable to strangers - or even, for good or for evil, to his enemies. 

He said, "My house is poor and my resources few. You may share what I have if your stomach 
can endure black bread and dried corn." 

Mallow shook his head, "No, I have eaten, and I can't stay. All I need are the directions to the 
center of government." 

"That is easily enough done, and poor though I am, deprives me of nothing. Do you mean the 
capital of the planet, or of the Imperial Sector?" 

The younger man's eyes narrowed, "Aren't the two identical? Isn't this Siwenna?" 

The old patrician nodded slowly, "Siwenna, yes. But Siwenna is no longer capital of the 
Normannic Sector. Your old map has misled you after all. The stars may not change even in 
centuries, but political boundaries are all too fluid." 

"That's too bad. In fact, that's very bad. Is the new capital far off?" 

"It's on Orsha II. Twenty parsecs off. Your map will direct you. How old is it?" 

"A hundred and fifty years." 

"That old?" The old man sighed. "History has been crowded since. Do you know any of it?" 
Mallow shook his bead slowly. 

Barr said, "You're fortunate. It has been an evil time for the provinces, but for the reign of 
Stannell VI, and he died fifty years ago. Since that time, rebellion and ruin, ruin and rebellion." 
Barr wondered if he were growing garrulous. It was a lonely life out here, and he had so little 
chance to talk to men. 

Mallow said with sudden sharpness, "Ruin, eh? You sound as if the province were 
impoverished." 

"Perhaps not on an absolute scale. The physical resources of twenty-five first-rank planets take 



a long time to use up. Compared to the wealth of the last century, though, we have gone a long 
way downhill - and there is no sign of turning, not yet. Why are you so interested in all this, 
young man? You are all alive and your eyes shine!" 

The trader came near enough to blushing, as the faded eyes seemed to look too deep into his 
and smile at what they saw. 

He said, "Now look here. I'm a trader out there - out toward the rim of the Galaxy. I've located 
some old maps, and I'm out to open new markets. Naturally, talk of impoverished provinces 
disturbs me. You can't get money out of a world unless money's there to be got. Now how's 
Siwenna, for instance?" 

The old man leaned forward, "I cannot say. It will do even yet, perhaps. But you a trader? You 
look more like a fighting man. You hold your hand near your gun and there is a scar on your 
jawbone." 

Mallow jerked his head, "There isn't much law out there where I come from. Fighting and scars 
are part of a trader's overhead. But fighting is only useful when there's money at the end, and if 
I can get it without, so much the sweeter. Now will I find enough money here to make it worth 
the fighting? I take it I can find the fighting easily enough." 

"Easily enough," agreed Barr. "You could join Wiscard's remnants in the Red Stars. I don't 
know, though, if you'd call that fighting or piracy. Or you could join our present gracious viceroy 
- gracious by right of murder, pillage, rapine, and the word of a boy Emperor, since rightfully 
assassinated." The patrician's thin cheeks reddened. His eyes closed and then opened, 
bird-bright. 

"You don't sound very friendly to the viceroy, Patrician Barr," said Mallow. "What if I'm one of 
his spies?" 

"What if you are?" said Barr, bitterly. "What can you take?" He gestured a withered arm at the 
bare interior of the decaying mansion. 

"Your life." 

"It would leave me easily enough. It has been with me five years too long. But you are not one 
of the viceroy's men. If you were, perhaps even now instinctive self-preservation would keep 
my mouth closed." 

"How do you know?" 

The old man laughed, "You seem suspicious - Come, I'll wager you think I'm trying to trap you 
into denouncing the government. No, no. I am past politics." 

"Past politics? Is a man ever past that? The words you used to describe the viceroy - what 
were they? Murder, pillage, all that. You didn't sound objective. Not exactly. Not as if you were 
past politics." 

The old man shrugged, "Memories sting when they come suddenly. Listen! Judge for yourself! 
When Siwenna was the provincial capital, I was a patrician and a member of the provincial 



senate. My family was an old and honored one. One of my great-grandfathers had been- No, 
never mind that. Past glories are poor feeding." 

"I take it," said Mallow, "there was a civil war, or a revolution." 

Barr's face darkened. "Civil wars are chronic in these degenerate days, but Siwenna had kept 
apart. Under Stannell VI, it had almost achieved its ancient prosperity. But weak emperors 
followed, and weak emperors mean strong viceroys, and our last viceroy - the same Wiscard, 
whose remnants still prey on the commerce among the Red Stars - aimed at the Imperial 
Purple. He wasn't the first to aim. And if he had succeeded, he wouldn't have been the first to 
succeed. 

"But he failed. For when the Emperor's Admiral approached the province at the head of a fleet, 
Siwenna itself rebelled against its rebel viceroy." He stopped, sadly. 

Mallow found himself tense on the edge of his seat, and relaxed slowly, "Please continue, sir." 

"Thank you," said Barr, wearily. "It's kind of you to humor an old man. They rebelled; or I should 
say, we rebelled, for I was one of the minor leaders. Wiscard left Siwenna, barely ahead of us, 
and the planet, and with it the province, were thrown open to the admiral with every gesture of 
loyalty to the Emperor. Why we did this, -I'm not sure. Maybe we felt loyal to the symbol, if not 
the person, of the Emperor, -a cruel and vicious child. Maybe we feared the horrors of a siege." 

"Well?" urged Mallow, gently. 

"Well, came the grim retort, "that didn't suit the admiral. He wanted the glory of conquering a 
rebellious province and his men wanted the loot such conquest would involve. So while the 
people were still gathered in every large city, cheering the Emperor and his admiral, he 
occupied all armed centers, and then ordered the population put to the nuclear blast." 

"On what pretext?" 

"On the pretext that they had rebelled against their viceroy, the Emperor's anointed. And the 
admiral became the new viceroy, by virtue of one month of massacre, pillage and complete 
horror. I had six sons. Five died - variously. I had a daughter. I hope she died, eventually. / 
escaped because I was old. I came here, too old to cause even our viceroy worry." He bent his 
gray head, "They left me nothing, because I had helped drive out a rebellious governor and 
deprived an admiral of his glory." 

Mallow sat silent, and waited. Then, "What of your sixth son?" he asked softly. 

"Eh?" Barr smiled acidly. "He is safe, for he has joined the admiral as a common soldier under 
an assumed name. He is a gunner in the viceroy's personal fleet. Oh, no, I see your eyes. He is 
not an unnatural son. He visits me when he can and gives me what he can. He keeps me alive. 
And some day, our great and glorious viceroy will grovel to his death, and it will be my son who 
will be his executioner." 

"And you tell this to a stranger? You endanger your son." 

"No. I help him, by introducing a new enemy. And were I a friend of the viceroy, as I am his 



enemy, I would tell him to string outer space with ships, clear to the rim of the Galaxy." 

"There are no ships there?" 

"Did you find any? Did any space-guards question your entry? With ships few enough, and the 
bordering provinces filled with their share of intrigue and iniquity, none can be spared to guard 
the barbarian outer suns. No danger ever threatened us from the broken edge of the Galaxy, 
-until you came." 

"I? I'm no danger." 

"There will be more after you." 

Mallow shook his head slowly, "I'm not sure I understand you." 

"Listen!" There was a feverish edge to the old man's voice. "I knew you when you entered. You 
have a force-shield about your body, or had when I first saw you." 

Doubtful silence, then, "Yes, -I had." 

"Good. That was a flaw, but you didn't know that. There are some things I know. It's out of 
fashion in these decaying times to be a scholar. Events race and flash past and who cannot 
fight the tide with nuclear-blast in hand is swept away, as I was. But I was a scholar, and I know 
that in all the history of nucleics, no portable force-shield was ever invented. We have 
force-shields - huge, lumbering powerhouses that will protect a city, or even a ship, but not 
one, single man." 

"Ah?" Mallow's underlip thrust out. "And what do you deduce from that?" 

"There have been stories percolating through space. They travel strange paths and become 
distorted with every parsec, -but when I was young there was a small ship of strange men, who 
did not know our customs and could not tell where they came from. They talked of magicians at 
the edge of the Galaxy; magicians who glowed in the darkness, who flew unaided through the 
air, and whom weapons would not touch. 

"We laughed. I laughed, too. I forgot it till today. But you glow in the darkness, and I don't think 
my blaster, if I had one, would hurt you. Tell me, can you fly through air as you sit there now?" 

Mallow said calmly, "I can make nothing of all this." 

Barr smiled, "I'm content with the answer. I do not examine my guests. But if there are 
magicians; if you are one of them; there may some day be a great influx of them, or you. 
Perhaps that would be well. Maybe we need new blood." He muttered soundlessly to himself, 
then, slowly, "But it works the other way, too. Our new viceroy also dreams, as did our old 
Wiscard." 

"Also after the Emperor's crown?" 

Barr nodded, "My son hears tales. In the viceroy's personal entourage, one could scarcely help 
it. And he tells me of them. Our new viceroy would not refuse the Crown if offered, but he 
guards his line of retreat. There are stories that, failing Imperial heights, he plans to carve out a 



new Empire in the Barbarian hinterland. It is said, but I don't vouch for this, that he has already 
given one of his daughters as wife to a Kinglet somewhere in the uncharted Periphery." 

"If one listened to every story-" 

"I know. There are many more. I'm old and I babble nonsense. But what do you say?" And 
those sharp, old eyes peered deep. 

The trader considered, "I say nothing. But I'd like to ask something. Does Siwenna have 
nuclear power? Now, wait, I know that it possesses the knowledge of nucleics. I mean, do they 
have power generators intact, or did the recent sack destroy them?" 

"Destroy them? Oh, no. Half a planet would be wiped out before the smallest power station 
would be touched. They are irreplaceable and the suppliers of the strength of the fleet." Almost 
proudly, "We have the largest and best on this side of Trantor itself." 

"Then what would I do first if I wanted to see these generators?" 

"Nothing!" replied Barr, decisively. "You couldn't approach any military center without being 
shot down instantly. Neither could anyone. Siwenna is still deprived of civic rights." 

"You mean all the power stations are under the military?" 

"No. There are the small city stations, the ones supplying power for heating and lighting homes, 
powering vehicles and so forth. Those are almost as bad. They're controlled by the tech-men." 

"Who are they?" 

"A specialized group which supervises the power plants. The honor is hereditary, the young 
ones being brought up in the profession as apprentices. Strict sense of duty, honor, and all that. 
No one but a tech-man could enter a station." 

"I see." 

"I don't say, though," added Barr, "that there aren't cases where tech-men haven't been bribed. 
In days when we have nine emperors in fifty years and seven of these are assassinated, -when 
every space-captain aspires to the usurpation of a viceroyship, and every viceroy to the 
Imperium, 

I suppose even a tech-man can fall prey to money. But it would require a good deal, and I have 
none. Have you?" 

"Money? No. But does one always bribe with money?" 

"What else, when money buys all else." 

"There is quite enough that money won't buy. And now if you'll tell me the nearest city with one 
of the stations, and how best to get there, I'll thank you." 

"Wait!" Barr held out his thin hands. "Where do you rush? You come here, but / ask no 
questions. In the city, where the inhabitants are still called rebels, you would be challenged by 
the first soldier or guard who heard your accent and saw your clothes." 



He rose and from an obscure comer of an old chest brought out a booklet. "My passport, 
-forged. I escaped with it." 

He placed it in Mallow's hand and folded the fingers over it. "The description doesn't fit, but if 
you flourish it, the chances are many to one they will not look closely." 

"But you. You'll be left without one." 

The old exile shrugged cynically, "What of it? And a further caution. Curb your tongue! Your 
accent is barbarous, your idioms peculiar, and every once in a while you deliver yourself of the 
most astounding archaisms. The less you speak, the less suspicion you will draw upon 
yourself. Now I'll tell you how to get to the city-" 

Five minutes later, Mallow was gone. 

He returned but once, for a moment, to the old patrician's house, before leaving it entirely, 
however. And when Onum Barr stepped into his little garden early the next morning, he found a 
box at his feet. It contained provisions, concentrated provisions such as one would find aboard 
ship, and alien in taste and preparation. 

But they were good, and lasted long. 


11 . 

The tech-man was short, and his skin glistened with well-kept plumpness. His hair was a fringe 
and his skull shone through pinkly. The rings on his fingers were thick and heavy, his clothes 
were scented, and he was the first man Mallow had met on the planet who hadn't looked 
hungry. 

The tech-man's lips pursed peevishly, "Now, my man, quickly. I have things of great importance 
waiting for me. You seem a stranger-" He seemed to evaluate Mallow's definitely 
un-Siwennese costume and his eyelids were heavy with suspicion. 

"I am not of the neighborhood," said Mallow, calmly, "but the matter is irrelevant. I have had the 
honor to send you a little gift yesterday-" 

The tech-man's nose lifted, "I received it. An interesting gewgaw. I may have use for it on 
occasion." 

"I have other and more interesting gifts. Quite out of the gewgaw stage." 

"Oh-h?" The tech-man's voice lingered thoughtfully over the monosyllable. "I think I already see 
the course of the interview; it has happened before. You are going to give me some trifle or 
other. A few credits, perhaps a cloak, second-rate jewelry; anything your little soul may think 
sufficient to corrupt a tech-man." His lower lip puffed out belligerently, "And I know what you 
wish in exchange. There have been others and to spare with the same bright idea. You wish to 
be adopted into our clan. You wish to be taught the mysteries of nucleics and the care of the 



machines. You think because you dogs of Siwenna - and probably your strangerhood is 
assumed for safety's sake - are being daily punished for your rebellion that you can escape 
what you deserve by throwing over yourselves the privileges and protections of the tech-man's 
guild." 

Mallow would have spoken, but the tech-man raised himself into a sudden roar. "And now leave 
before I report your name to the Protector of the City. Do you think that I would betray the trust? 
The Siwennese traitors that preceded me would have - perhaps! But you deal with a different 
breed now. Why, Galaxy, I marvel that I do not kill you myself at this moment with my bare 
hands." 

Mallow smiled to himself. The entire speech was patently artificial in tone and content, so that 
all the dignified indignation degenerated into uninspired farce. 

The trader glanced humorously at the two flabby hands that had been named as his possible 
executioners then and there, and said, "Your Wisdom, you are wrong on three counts. First, I 
am not a creature of the viceroy come to test your loyalty. Second, my gift is something the 
Emperor himself in all his splendor does not and will never possess. Third, what I wish in return 
is very little; a nothing; a mere breath." 

"So you say!" He descended into heavy sarcasm. "Come, what is this imperial donation that 
your godlike power wishes to bestow upon me? Something the Emperor doesn't have, eh?" He 
broke into a sharp squawk of derision. 

Mallow rose and pushed the chair aside, "I have waited three days to see you, Your Wisdom, 
but the display will take only three seconds. If you will just draw that blaster whose butt I see 
very near your hand-" 

"Eh?" 

"And shoot me, I will be obliged." 

"What?â€ 

"If I am killed, you can tell the police I tried to bribe you into betraying guild secrets. You'll 
receive high praise. If I am not killed, you may have my shield." 

For the first time, the tech-man became aware of the dimly-white illumination that hovered 
closely about his visitor, as though he had been dipped in pearl-dust. His blaster raised to the 
level and with eyes a-squint in wonder and suspicion, he closed contact. 

The molecules of air caught in the sudden surge of atomic disruption, tore into glowing, burning 
ions, and marked out the blinding thin line that struck at Mallow's heart - and splashed! 

While Mallow's look of patience never changed, the nuclear forces that tore at him consumed 
themselves against that fragile, pearly illumination, and crashed back to die in mid-air. 

The tech-man's blaster dropped to the floor with an unnoticed crash. 

Mallow said, "Does the Emperor have a personal force-shield? You can have one." 



The tech-man stuttered, "Are you a tech-man?" 

"No." 

"Then - then where did you get that?" 

"What do you care?" Mallow was coolly contemptuous. "Do you want it?" A thin, knobbed chain 
fell upon the desk, "There it is." 

The tech-man snatched it up and fingered it nervously, "Is this complete?" 

"Complete." 

"Where's the power?" 

Mallow's finger fell upon the largest knob, dull in its leaden case. 

The tech-man looked up, and his face was congested with blood, "Sir, I am a tech-man, senior 
grade. I have twenty years behind me as supervisor and I studied under the great Bier at the 
University of Trantor. If you have the infernal charlatanry to tell me that a small container the 
size of a - of a walnut, blast it, holds a nuclear generator, I'll have you before the Protector in 
three seconds." 

"Explain it yourself then, if you can. I say it's complete." 

The tech-man's flush faded slowly as he bound the chain about his waist, and, following 
Mallow's gesture, pushed the knob. The radiance that surrounded him shone into dim relief. His 
blaster lifted, then hesitated. Slowly, he adjusted it to an almost burnless minimum. 

And then, convulsively, he closed circuit and the nuclear fire dashed against his hand, 
harmlessly. 

.He whirled, "And what if I shoot you now, and keep the shield." 

"Try!" said Mallow. "Do you think I gave you my only sample?" And he, too, was solidly incased 
in light. 

The tech-man giggled nervously. The blaster clattered onto the desk. He said, "And what is this 
mere nothing, this breath, that you wish in return'?" 

"I want to see your generators." 

"You realize that that is forbidden. It would mean ejection into space for both of us-" 

"I don't want to touch them or have anything to do with them. I want to see them - from a 
distance." 

"If not?" 

"If not, you have your shield, but I have other things. For one thing, a blaster especially 
designed to pierce that shield." 

"Hm-m-m." The tech-man's eyes shifted. "Come with me." 



12 . 


The tech-man's home was a small two-story affair on the Outskirts of the huge, cubiform, 
windowless affair that dominated the center of the city. Mallow passed from one to the other 
through an underground passage, and found himself in the silent, ozone-tinged atmosphere of 
the powerhouse. 

For fifteen minutes, he followed his guide and said nothing. His eyes missed nothing. His 
fingers touched nothing. And then, the tech-man said in strangled tones, "Have you had 
enough? I couldn't trust my underlings in this case." 

"Could you ever?" asked Mallow, ironically. "I've had enough." 

They were back in the office and Mallow said, thoughtfully, "And all those generators are in 
your hands?" 

"Every one," said the tech-man, with more than a touch of complacency. 

"And you keep them running and in order?" 

"Right!" 

"And if they break down?" 

The tech-man shook his head indignantly, "They don't break down. They never break down. 
They were built for eternity." 

"Eternity is a long time. Just suppose-" 

"It is unscientific to suppose meaningless cases." 

"All right. Suppose I were to blast a vital part into nothingness? I suppose the machines aren't 
immune to nuclear forces? Suppose I fuse a vital connection, or smash a quartz D-tube?" 

"Well, then," shouted the tech-man, furiously, "you would be killed." 

"Yes, I know that," Mallow was shouting, too, "but what about the generator? Could you repair 
it?" 

"Sir," the tech-man howled his words, "you have had a fair return. You've had what you asked 
for. Now get out! I owe you nothing more!" 

Mallow bowed with a satiric respect and left. 

Two days later he was back where the Far Star waited to return with him to the planet, 
Terminus. 

And two days later, the tech-man's shield went dead, and for all his puzzling and cursing never 
glowed again. 



13 . 


Mallow relaxed for almost the first time in six months. He was on his back in the sunroom of his 
new house, stripped to the skin. His great, brown arms were thrown up and out, and the 
muscles tautened into a stretch, then faded into repose. 

The man beside him placed a cigar between Mallow's teeth and lit it. He champed on one of his 
own and said, "You must be overworked. Maybe you need a long rest." 

"Maybe I do, Jael, but I'd rather rest in a council seat. Because I'm going to have that seat, and 
you're going to help me." 

Ankor Jael raised his eyebrows and said, "How did I get into this?" 

"You got in obviously. Firstly, you're an old dog of a politico. Secondly, you were booted out of 
your cabinet seat by Jorane Sutt, the same fellow who'd rather lose an eyeball than see me in 
the council. You don't think much of my chances, do you?" 

"Not much," agreed the ex-Minister of Education. "You're a Smyrnian." 

"That's no legal bar. I've had a lay education." 

"Well, come now. Since when does prejudice follow any law but its own. Now, how about your 
own man - this Jaim Twer? What does he say?" 

"He spoke about running me for council almost a year ago," replied Mallow easily, "but I've 
outgrown him. He couldn't have pulled it off in any case. Not enough depth. He's loud and 
forceful - but that's only an expression of nuisance value. I'm off to put over a real coup. I need 
you." 

"Jorane Sutt is the cleverest politician on the planet and he'll be against you. I don't claim to be 
able to outsmart him. And don't think he doesn't fight hard, and dirty." 

"I've got money." 

"Mat helps. But it takes a lot to buy off prejudice, you dirty Smyrnian." 

"I'll have a lot." 

"Well, I'll look into the matter. But don't ever you crawl up on your hind legs and bleat that I 
encouraged you in the matter. Who's that?" 

Mallow pulled the corners of his mouth down, and said, "Jorane Sutt himself, I think. He's early, 
and I can understand it. Iâ€™ve been dodging him for a month. Look, Jael, get into the next room, 
and turn the speaker on low. I want you to listen." 

He helped the council member out of the room with a shove of his bare foot, then scrambled up 
and into a silk robe. The synthetic sunlight faded to normal power. 

The secretary to the mayor entered stiffly, while the solemn major-domo tiptoed the door shut 
behind him. 



Mallow fastened his belt and said, "Take your choice of chairs, Sutt." 

Sutt barely cracked a flickering smile. The chair he chose was comfortable but he did not relax 
into it. From its edge, he said, "If you'll state your terms to begin with, we'll get down to 
business." 

"What terms?" 

"You wish to be coaxed? Well, then, what, for instance, did you do at Korell? Your report was 
incomplete." 

"I gave it to you months ago. You were satisfied then." 

Yes," Sutt rubbed his forehead thoughtfully with one finger, "but since then your activities have 
been significant. We know a good deal of what you're doing, Mallow. We know, exactly, how 
many factories you're putting up; in what a hurry you're doing it; and how much it's costing you. 
And there's this palace you have," he gazed about him with a cold lack of appreciation, "which 
set you back considerably more than my annual salary; and a swathe you've been cutting - a 
very considerable and expensive swathe - through the upper layers of Foundation society." 

"So? Beyond proving that you employ capable spies, what does it show?" 

"It shows you have money you didn't have a year ago. And that can show anything - for 
instance, that a good deal went on at Korell that we know nothing of. Where are you getting 
your money?" 

"My dear Sutt, you can't really expect me to tell you." 

"I don't." 

"I didn't think you did. That's why I'm going to tell you. It's straight from the treasure-chests of 
the Commdor of Korell." 

Sutt blinked. 

Mallow smiled and continued. "Unfortunately for you, the money is quite legitimate. I'm a Master 
Trader and the money I received was a quantity of wrought iron and chromite in exchange for a 
number of trinkets I was able to supply him with. Fifty per cent of the profit is mine by 
hidebound contract with the Foundation. The other half goes to the government at the end of 
the year when all good citizens pay their income tax." 

"There was no mention of any trade agreement in your report." 

"Nor was there any mention of what I had for breakfast that day, or the name of my current 
mistress, or any other irrelevant detail." Mallow's smile was fading into a sneer. "I was sent - to 
quote yourself - to keep my eyes open. They were never, shut. You wanted to find out what 
happened to the captured Foundation merchant ships. I never saw or heard of them. You 
wanted to find out if Korell had nuclear power. My report tells of nuclear blasters in the 
possession of the Commdor's private bodyguard. I saw no other signs. And the blasters I did 
see are relics of the old Empire, and may be show-pieces that do not work, for all my 
knowledge. 



"So far, I followed orders, but beyond that I was, and. still am, a free agent. According to the 
laws of the Foundation, a Master Trader may open whatever new markets he can, and receive 
therefrom his due half of the profits. What are your objections? I don't see them." 

Sutt bent his eyes carefully towards the wall and spoke with a difficult lack of anger, "It is the 
general custom of all traders to advance the religion with their trade." 

"I adhere to law, and not to custom." 

"There are times when custom can be the higher law." 

"Then appeal to the courts." 

Sutt raised somber eyes which seemed to retreat into their sockets. "You're a Smyrnian after 
all. It seems naturalization and education can't wipe out the taint in the blood. Listen, and try to 
understand, just the same. 

"This goes beyond money, or markets. We have the science of the great Hari Seldon to prove 
that upon us depends the future empire of the Galaxy, and from the course that leads to that 
Imperium we cannot turn. The religion we have is our all-important instrument towards that end. 
With it we have brought the Four Kingdoms under our control, even at the moment when they 
would have crushed us. It is the most potent device known with which to control men and 
worlds. 

"The primary reason for the development of trade and traders was to introduce and spread this 
religion more quickly, and to insure that the introduction of new techniques and a new economy 
would be subject to our thorough and intimate control." 

Fie paused for breath, and Mallow interjected quietly, "I know the theory. I understand it 
entirely." 

"Do you? It is more than I expected. Then you see, of course, that your attempt at trade for its 
own sake; at mass production of worthless gadgets, which can only affect a world's economy 
superficially; at the subversion of interstellar policy to the god of profits; at the divorce of 
nuclear power from our controlling religion - can only end with the overthrow and complete 
negation of the policy that has worked successfully for a century." 

"And time enough, too," said Mallow, indifferently, "for a policy outdated, dangerous and 
impossible. Flowever well your religion has succeeded in the Four Kingdoms, scarcely another 
world in the Periphery has accepted it. At the time we seized control of the Kingdoms, there 
were a sufficient number of exiles, Galaxy knows, to spread the story of how Salvor Hardin 
used the priesthood and the superstition of the people to overthrow the independence and 
power of the secular monarchs. And if that wasn't enough, the case of Askone two decades 
back made it plain enough. There isn't a ruler in the Periphery now that wouldn't sooner cut his 
own throat than let a priest of the Foundation enter the territory. 

"I don't propose to force Korell or any other world to accept something I know they don't want. 
No, Sutt. If nuclear power makes them dangerous, a sincere friendship through trade will be 
many times better than an insecure overlordship, based on the hated supremacy of a foreign 



spiritual power, which, once it weakens ever so slightly, can only fall entirely and leave nothing 
substantial behind except an immortal fear and hate." 

Suit said cynically, "Very nicely put. So, to get back to the original point of discussion, what are 
your terms? What do you require to exchange your ideas for mine?" 

"You think my convictions are for sale?" 

"Why not?" came the cold response. "Isn't that your business, buying and selling?" 

"Only at a profit," said Mallow, unoffended. "Can you offer me more than I'm getting as is?" 
"You could have three-quarters of your trade profits, rather than half." 

Mallow laughed shortly, "A fine offer. The whole of the trade on your terms would fall far below 
- a tenth share on mine. Try harder than that." 

"You could have a council seat." 

"I'll have that anyway, without and despite you." 

With a sudden movement, Sutt clenched his fist, "You could also save yourself a prison term. 
Of twenty years, if I have my way. Count the profit in that." 

"No profit at all, but can you fulfill such a threat?" 

"How about a trial for murder?" 

"Whose murder?" asked Mallow, contemptuously. 

Sutt's voice was harsh now, though no louder than before, "The murder of an Anacreonian 
priest, in the service of the Foundation." 

"Is that so now? And what's your evidence?" 

The secretary to the mayor leaned forward, "Mallow, I'm not bluffing. The preliminaries are 
over. I have only to sign one final paper and the case of the Foundation versus Hober Mallow, 
Master Trader, is begun. You abandoned a subject of the Foundation to torture and death at 
the hands of an alien mob, Mallow, and you have only five seconds to prevent the punishment 
due you. For myself, I'd rather you decided to bluff it out. You'd be safer as a destroyed enemy, 
than as a doubtfully-converted friend." 

Mallow said solemnly, "You have your wish." 

"Good!" and the secretary smiled savagely. "It was the mayor who wished the preliminary 
attempt at compromise, not I. Witness that I did not try too hard." 

The door opened before him, and he left. 

Mallow looked up as Ankor Jael re-entered the room. 

Mallow said, "Did you hear him?" 



The politician flopped to the floor. "I never heard him as angry as that, since I've known the 
snake." 

"All right. What do you make of it?" 

"Well, I'll tell you. A foreign policy of domination through spiritual means is his idee fixe, but it's 
my notion that his ultimate aims aren't spiritual. I was fired out of the Cabinet for arguing on the 
same issue, as I needn't tell you." 

"You needn't. And what are those unspiritual aims according to your notion?" 

Jael grew serious, "Well, he's not stupid, so he must see the bankruptcy of our religious policy, 
which has hardly made a single conquest for us in seventy years. He's obviously using it for 
purposes of his own. 

"Now any dogma primarily based on faith and emotionalism, is a dangerous weapon to use on 
others, since it is almost impossible to guarantee that the weapon will never be turned on the 
user. For a hundred years now, we've supported a ritual and mythology that is becoming more 
and more venerable, traditional - and immovable. In some ways, it isn't under our control any 
more." 

"In what ways?" demanded Mallow. "Don't stop. I want your thoughts." 

"Well, suppose one man, one ambitious man, uses the force of religion against us, rather than 
for us." 

"You mean Sutt-" 

"You're right. I mean Sutt. Listen, man, if he could mobilize the various hierarchies on the 
subject planets against the Foundation in the name of orthodoxy, what chance would we 
stand? By planting himself at the head of the standards of the pious, he could make war on 
heresy, as represented by you, for instance, and make himself king eventually. After all, it was 
Hardin who said: 'A nuclear blaster is a good weapon, but it can point both ways.'" 

Mallow slapped his bare thigh, "All right, Jael, then get me in that council, and I'll fight him." 

Jael paused, then said significantly, "Maybe not. What was all that about having a priest 
lynched? Is isn't true, is it?" 

"It's true enough," Mallow said, carelessly. 

Jael whistled, "Has he definite proof?" 

"He should have." Mallow hesitated, then added, "Jaim Twer was his man from the beginning, 
though neither of them knew that I knew that. And Jaim Twer was an eyewitness." 

Jael shook his head. "Uh-uh. That's bad." 

"Bad? What's bad about it? That priest was illegally upon the planet by the Foundation's own 
laws. He was obviously used by the Korellian government as a bait, whether involuntary or not. 
By all the laws of common-sense, I had no choice but one action - and that action was strictly 



within the law. If he brings me to trial, he'll do nothing but make a prime fool of himself." 

And Jael shook his head again, "No, Mallow, you've missed it. I told you he played dirty. He's 
not out to convict you; he knows he can't do that. But he is out to ruin your standing with the 
people. You heard what he said. Custom is higher than law, at times. You could walk out of the 
trial scot-free, but if the people think you threw a priest to the dogs, your popularity is gone. 

"They'll admit you did the legal thing, even the sensible thing. But just the same you'll have 
been, in their eyes, a cowardly dog, an unfeeling brute, a hard-hearted monster. And you would 
never get elected to the council. You might even lose your rating as Master Trader by having 
your citizenship voted away from you. You're not native born, you know. What more do you 
think Sutt can want?" Mallow frowned stubbornly, "So!" "My boy," said Jael. "I'll stand by you, 
but / can't help. You're on the spot, -dead center." 


14 . 

The council chamber was full in a very literal sense on the fourth day of the trial of Hober 
Mallow, Master Trader. The only councilman absent was feebly cursing the fractured skull that 
had bedridden him. The galleries were filled to the aisleways and ceilings with those few of the 
crowd who by influence, wealth, or sheer diabolic perseverance had managed to get in. The 
rest filled the square outside, in swarming knots about the open-air trimensional 'visors. 

Ankor Jael made his way into the chamber with the near-futile aid and exertions of the police 
department, and then through the scarcely smaller confusion within to Hober Mallow's seat. 

Mallow turned with relief, "By Seldon, you cut it thin. Have you got it?" 

"Here, take it," said Jael. "It's everything you asked for." 

"Good. How are they taking it outside?" 

"They're wild clear through." Jael stirred uneasily, "You should never have allowed public 
hearings. You could have stopped them." 

"I didn't want to." 

"There's lynch talk. And Publis Manlio's men on the outer planets-" 

"I wanted to ask you about that, Jael. He's stirring up the Hierarchy against me, is he?" 

"Is he? It's the sweetest setup you ever saw, As Foreign Secretary, he handles the prosecution 
in a case of interstellar law. As High Priest and Primate of the Church, he rouses the fanatic 
hordes-" 

"Well, forget it. Do you remember that Hardin quotation you threw at me last month? We'll show 
them that the nuclear blaster can point both ways." 

The mayor was taking his seat now and the council members were rising in respect. 

Mallow whispered, "It's my turn today. Sit here and watch the fun." 



The day's proceedings began and fifteen minutes later, Hober Mallow stepped through a hostile 
whisper to the empty space before the mayor's bench. A lone beam of light centered upon him 
and in the public 'visors of the city, as well as on the myriads of private 'visors in almost every 
home of the Foundation's planets, the lonely giant figure of a man stared out defiantly. 

He began easily and quietly, "To save time, I will admit the truth of every point made against 
me by the prosecution. The story of the priest and the mob as related by them is perfectly 
accurate in every detail." 

There was a stirring in the chamber and a triumphant mass-snarl from the gallery. He waited 
patiently for silence. 

"However, the picture they presented fell short of completion. I ask the privilege of supplying 
the completion in my own fashion. My story may seem irrelevant at first. I ask your indulgence 
for that." 

Mallow made no reference to the notes before him. 

"I begin at the same time as the prosecution did; the day of my meeting with Jorane Sutt and 
Jaim Twer. What went on at those meetings you know. The conversations have been 
described, and to that description I have nothing to add - except my own thoughts of that day. 

"They were suspicious thoughts, for the events of that day were queer. Consider. Two people, 
neither of whom I knew more than casually, make unnatural and somewhat unbelievable 
propositions to me. One, the secretary to the mayor, asks me to play the part of intelligence 
agent to the government in a highly confidential matter, the nature and importance of which has 
already been explained to you. The other, self-styled leader of a political party, asks me to run 
for a council seat. 

"Naturally I looked for the ulterior motive. Sutt's seemed evident. He didn't trust me. Perhaps he 
thought I was selling nuclear power to enemies and plotting rebellion. And perhaps he was 
forcing the issue, or thought he was. In that case, he would need a man of his own near me on 
my proposed mission, as a spy. The last thought, however, did not occur to me until later on, 
when Jaim Twer came on the scene. 

"Consider again: Twer presents himself as a trader, retired into politics, yet I know of no details 
of his trading career, although my knowledge of the field is immense. And further, although 
Twer boasted of a lay education, he had never heard of a Seldon crisis." 

Hober Mallow waited to let the significance sink in and was rewarded with the first silence he 
had yet encountered, as the gallery caught its collective breath. That was for the inhabitants of 
Terminus itself. The men of the Outer Planets could hear only censored versions that would 
suit the requirements of religion. They would hear nothing of Seldon crises. But there would be 
further strokes they would not miss. 

Mallow continued: 

"Who here can honestly state that any man with a lay education can possibly be ignorant of the 
nature of a Seldon crisis? There is only one type of education upon the Foundation that 



excludes all mention of the planned history of Seldon and deals only with the man himself as a 
semi-mythical wizard- 

"I knew at that instant that Jaim Twer had never been a trader. I knew then that he was in holy 
orders and perhaps a full-fledged priest; and, doubtless, that for the three years he had 
pretended to head a political party of the traders, he had been a bought man of Jorane Sutt. 

"At the moment, I struck in the dark. I did not know Sun's purposes with regard to myself, but 
since he seemed to be feeding me rope liberally, I handed him a few fathoms of my own. My 
notion was that Twer was to be with me on my voyage as unofficial guardian on behalf of 
Jorane Sutt. Well, if he didn't get on, I knew well there'd be other devices waiting - and those 
others I might not catch in time. A known enemy is relatively safe. I invited Twer to come with 
me. He accepted. 

"That, gentlemen of the council, explains two things. First, it tells you that Twer is not a friend of 
mine testifying against me reluctantly and for conscience' sake, as the prosecution would have 
you believe. He is a spy, performing his paid job. Secondly, it explains a certain action of mine 
on the occasion of the first appearance of the priest whom I am accused of having murdered - 
an action as yet unmentioned, because unknown." 

Now there was a disturbed whispering in the council. Mallow cleared his throat theatrically, and 
continued: 

"I hate to describe my feelings when I first heard that we had a refugee missionary on board. I 
even hate to remember them. Essentially, they consisted of wild uncertainty. The event struck 
me at the moment as a move by Sutt, and passed beyond my comprehension or calculation. I 
was at sea - and completely. 

"There was one thing I could do. I got rid of Twer for five minutes by sending him after my 
officers. In his absence, I set up a Visual Record receiver, so that whatever happened might be 
preserved for future study. This was in the hope, the wild but earnest hope, that what confused 
me at the time might become plain upon review. 

"I have gone over that Visual Record some fifty times since. I have it here with me now, and will 
repeat the job a fifty-first time in your presence right now." 

The mayor pounded monotonously for order, as the chamber lost its equilibrium and the gallery 
roared. In five million homes on Terminus, excited observers crowded their receiving sets more 
closely, and at the prosecutor's own bench, Jorane Sutt shook his head coldly at the nervous 
high priest, while his eyes blazed fixedly on Mallow's face. 

The center of the chamber was cleared, and the lights burnt low. Ankor Jael, from his bench on 
the left, made the adjustments, and with a preliminary click, a holographic scene sprang to 
view; in color, in three-dimensions, in every attribute of life but life itself. 

There was the missionary, confused and battered, standing between the lieutenant and the 
sergeant. Mallow's image waited silently, and then men filed in, Twer bringing up the rear. 

The conversation played itself out, word for word. The sergeant was disciplined, and the 
missionary was questioned. The mob appeared, their growl could be heard, and the Revered 



Jord Parma made his wild appeal. Mallow drew his gun, and the missionary, as he was 
dragged away, lifted his arms in a mad, final curse and a tiny flash of light came and went. 

The scene ended, with the officers frozen at the horror of the situation, while Twer clamped 
shaking hands over his ears, and Mallow calmly put his gun away. 

The lights were on again; the empty space in the center of the floor was no longer even 
apparently full. Mallow, the real Mallow of the present, took up the burden of his narration: 

"The incident, you see, is exactly as the prosecution has presented it - on the surface. I'll 
explain that shortly. Jaim Twer's emotions through the whole business shows clearly a priestly 
education, by the way. 

"It was on that same day that I pointed out certain incongruities in the episode to Twer. I asked 
him where the missionary came from in the midst of the near-desolate tract we occupied at the 
time. I asked further where the gigantic mob had come from with the nearest sizable town a 
hundred miles away. The prosecution has paid no attention to such problems. 

"Or to other points; for instance, the curious point of Jord Parma's blatant conspicuousness. A 
missionary on Korell, risking his life in defiance of both Korellian and Foundation law, parades 
about in a very new and very distinctive priestly costume. There's something wrong there. At 
the time, I suggested that the missionary was an unwitting accomplice of the Commdor, who 
was using him in an attempt to force us into an act of wildly illegal aggression, to justify, in law, 
his subsequent destruction of our ship and of us. 

"The prosecution has anticipated this justification of my actions. They have expected me to 
explain that the safety of my ship, my crew, my mission itself were at stake and could not be 
sacrificed for one man, when that man would, in any case, have been destroyed, with us or 
without us. They reply by muttering about the Foundation's 'honor' and the necessity of 
upholding our 'dignity' in order to maintain our ascendancy. 

"For some strange reason, however, the prosecution has neglected Jord Parma himself, -as an 
individual. They brought out no details concerning him; neither his birthplace, nor his education, 
nor any detail of previous history. The explanation of this will also explain the incongruities I 
have pointed out in the Visual Record you have just seen. The two are connected. 

"The prosecution has advanced no details concerning Jord Parma because it cannot. That 
scene you saw by Visual Record seemed phoney because Jord Parma was phoney. There 
never was a Jord Parma. This whole trial is the biggest farce ever cooked up over an issue that 
never existed. " 

Once more he had to wait for the babble to die down. Fie said, slowly: 

"I'm going to show you the enlargement of a single still from the Visual Record. It will speak for 
itself. Lights again, Jael." 

The chamber dimmed, and the empty air filled again with frozen figures in ghostly, waxen 
illusion. The officers of the Far Star struck their stiff, impossible attitudes. A gun pointed from 
Mallow's rigid hand. At his left, the Revered Jord Parma, caught in mid-shriek, stretched his 
claws upward, while the failing sleeves hung halfway. 



And from the missionary's hand there was that little gleam that in the previous showing had 
flashed and gone. It was a permanent glow now. 

"Keep your eye on that light on his hand," called Mallow from the shadows. "Enlarge that 
scene, Jael!" 

The tableau bloated quickly. Outer portions fell away as the missionary drew towards the center 
and became a giant. Then there was only a hand and an arm, and then only a hand, which 
filled everything and remained there in immense, hazy tautness. 

The light had become a set of fuzzy, glowing letters: K S P. 

"That," Mallow's voice boomed out, "is a sample of tatooing, gentlemen. Under ordinary light it 
is invisible, but under ultraviolet light - with which I flooded the room in taking this Visual 
Record, it stands out in high relief. I'll admit it is a naive method of secret identification, but it 
works on Korell, where UV light is not to be found on street comers. Even in our ship, detection 
was accidental. 

"Perhaps some of you have already guessed what K S P stands for. Jord Parma knew his 
priestly lingo well and did his job magnificently. Where he had learned it, and how, I cannot say, 
but K S P stands for 'Korellian Secret Police.'" 

Mallow shouted over the tumult, roaring against the noise, "I have collateral proof in the form of 
documents brought from Korell, which I can present to the council if required. 

"And where is now the prosecution's case? They have already made and re-made the 
monstrous suggestion that I should have fought for the missionary in defiance of the law, and 
sacrificed my mission, my ship, and myself to the 'honor' of the Foundation. 

"But to do it for an impostor? 

"Should I have done it then for a Korellian secret agent tricked out in the robes and verbal 
gymnastics probably borrowed of an Anacreonian exile? Would Jorane Sutt and Publis Manlio 
have had me fall into a stupid, odious trap-" 

His hoarsened voice faded into the featureless background of a shouting mob. He was being 
lifted onto shoulders, and carried to the mayor's bench. Out the windows, he could see a torrent 
of madmen swarming into the square to add to the thousands there already. 

Mallow looked about for Ankor Jael, but it was impossible to find any single face in the 
incoherence of the mass. Slowly he became aware of a rhythmic, repeated shout, that was 
spreading from a small beginning, and pulsing into insanity: 

"Long live Mallow - long live Mallow - long live Mallow-" 


15 . 

Ankor Jael blinked at Mallow out of a haggard face. The last two days had been mad, sleepless 



ones. 


"Mallow, you've put on a beautiful show, so don't spoil it by jumping too high. You can't 
seriously consider running for mayor. Mob enthusiasm is a powerful thing, but it's notoriously 
fickle." ' 

"Exactly!" said Mallow, grimly, "so we must coddle it, and the best way to do that is to continue 
the show." 

"Now what?" 

"You're to have Publis Manlio and Jorane Sutt arrested-" 


"What!" 

"Just what you hear. Have the mayor arrest them! I don't care what threats you use. I control 
the mob, -for today, at any rate. He won't dare face them." 

"But on what charge, man?" 

"On the obvious one. They've been inciting the priesthood of the outer planets to take sides in 
the factional quarrels of the Foundation. That's illegal, by Seldon. Charge them with 
'endangering the state.' And I don't care about a conviction any more than they did in my case. 
Just get them out of circulation until I'm mayor." 

"It's half a year till election." 

"Not too long!" Mallow was on his feet, and his sudden grip of Jael's arm was tight. "Listen, I'd 
seize the government by force if I had to - the way Salvor Hardin did a hundred years ago. 
There's still that Seldon crisis coming up, and when it comes I have to be mayor and high 
priest. Both I" 


Jael's brow furrowed. He said, quietly, "What's it going to be? Korell, after all?" 

Mallow nodded, "Of course. They'll declare war, eventually, though I'm betting it'll take another 
pair of years." 

"With nuclear ships?" 

"What do you think? Those three merchant ships we lost in their space sector weren't knocked 
over with compressed-air pistols. Jael, they're getting ships from the Empire itself. Don't open 
your mouth like a fool. I said the Empire! It's still there, you know. It many be gone here in the 
Periphery but in the Galactic center it's still very much alive. And one false move means that it, 
itself, may be on our neck. That's why I must be mayor and high priest. I'm the only man who 
knows how to fight the crisis." 

Jael swallowed dryly, "How? What are you going to do?" 



"Nothing." 

Jael smiled uncertainly, "Really! All of that!" 

But Mallow's answer was incisive, "When I'm boss of this Foundation, I'm going to do nothing. 
One hundred percent of nothing, and that is the secret of this crisis." 


16 . 

Asper Argo, the Well-Beloved, Commdor of the Korellian Republic greeted his wife's entry by a 
hangdog lowering of his scanty eyebrows. To her at least, his self-adopted epithet did not 
apply. Even he knew that. 

She said, in a voice as sleek as her hair and as cold as her eyes, "My gracious lord, I 
understand, has finally come to a decision upon the fate of the Foundation upstarts." 

"Indeed?" said the Commdor, sourly. "And what more does your versatile understanding 
embrace?" 

"Enough, my very noble husband. You had another of your vacillating consultations with your 
councilors. Fine advisors." With infinite scorn, "A herd of palsied purblind idiots hugging their 
sterile profits close to their sunken chests in the face of my father's displeasure." 

"And who, my dear," was the mild response, "is the excellent source from which your 
understanding understands all this?" 

The Commdora laughed shortly, "If I told you, my source would be more corpse than source." 

"Well, you'll have your own way, as always." The Commdor shrugged and turned away. "And 
as for your father's displeasure: I much fear me it extends to a niggardly refusal to supply more 
ships." 

"More ships!" She blazed away, hotly, "And haven't you five? Don't deny it. I know you have 
five; and a sixth is promised." 

"Promised for the last year." 

"But one - just one - can blast that Foundation into stinking rubble. Just one! One, to sweep 
their little pygmy boats out of space." 

"I couldn't attack their planet, even with a dozen." 

"And how long would their planet hold out with their trade ruined, and their cargoes of toys and 
trash destroyed?" "Those toys and trash mean money," he sighed. "A good deal of money." 

"But if you had the Foundation itself, would you not have all it contained'? And if you had my 
father's respect and gratitude, would you not have more than ever the Foundation could give 
you? It's been three years - more - since that barbarian came with his magic sideshow. It's 
long enough." 



"My dear!" The Commdor turned and faced her. "I am growing old. I am weary. I lack the 
resilience to withstand your rattling mouth. You say you know that I have decided. Well, I have. 
It is over, and there is war between Korell and the Foundation." 

"Well!" The Commdora's figure expanded and her eyes sparkled, "You learned wisdom at last, 
though in your dotage. And now when you are master of this hinterland, you may be sufficiently 
respectable to be of some weight and importance in the Empire. For one thing, we might leave 
this barbarous world and attend the viceroy's court. Indeed we might." 

She swept out, with a smile, and a hand on her hip. Her hair gleamed in the light. 

The Commdor waited, and then said to the closed door, with malignance and hate, "And when I 
am master of what you call the hinterland, I may be sufficiently respectable to do without your 
father's arrogance and his daughter's tongue. Completely - without!" 


17 . 

The senior lieutenant of the Dark Nebula stared in horror at the visiplate. 

"Great Galloping Galaxies!" It should have been a howl, but it was a whisper instead, "What's 
that?" 

It was a ship, but a whale to the Dark Nebula's minnow; and on its side was the 
Spaceship-and-Sun of the Empire. Every alarm on the ship yammered hysterically. 

The orders went out, and the Dark Nebula prepared to run if it could, and fight if it must, -while 
down in the hyperwave room, a message stormed its way through hyperspace to the 
Foundation. 

Over and over again! Partly a plea for help, but mainly a warning of danger. 


18 . 

Flober Mallow shuffled his feet wearily as he leafed through the reports. Two years of the 
mayoralty had made him a bit more housebroken, a bit softer, a bit more patient, -but it had not 
made him learn to like government reports and the mind-breaking officialese in which they were 
written. 

"Flow many ships did they get?" asked Jael. 

"Four trapped on the ground. Two unreported. All others accounted for and safe." Mallow 
grunted, "We should have done better, but it's just a scratch." 

There was no answer and Mallow looked up, "Does anything worry you?" 

"I wish Sutt would get here," was the almost irrelevant answer. 

"Ah, yes, and now we'll hear another lecture on the home front." 



"No, we won't," snapped Jael, "but you're stubborn, Mallow. You may have worked out the 
foreign situation to the last detail but you've never given a care about what goes on here on the 
home planet." 

"Well, that's your job, isn't it? What did I make you Minister of Education and Propaganda for?" 

"Obviously to send me to an early and miserable grave, for all the co-operation you give me. 

For the last year, I've been deafening you with the rising danger of Sutt and his Religionists. 
What good will your plans be, if Sutt forces a special election and has you thrown out?" 

"None, I admit." 

"And your speech last night just about handed the election to Sutt with a smile and a pat. Was 
there any necessity for being so frank?" 

"Isn't there such a thing as stealing Sutt's thunder?" 

"No," said Jael, violently, "not the way you did it. You claim to have foreseen everything, and 
don't explain why you traded with Korell to their exclusive benefit for three years. Your only plan 
of battle is to retire without a battle. You abandon all trade with the sectors of space near Korell. 
You openly proclaim a stalemate. You promise no offensive, even in the future. Galaxy, Mallow, 
what am I supposed to do with such a mess?" 

"It lacks glamor?" 

"It lacks mob emotion-appeal." 

"Same thing." 

"Mallow, wake up. You have two alternatives. Either you present the people with a dynamic 
foreign policy, whatever your private plans are, or you make some sort of compromise with 
Sutt." 

Mallow said, "All right, if I've failed the first, let's try the second. Sutt's just arrived." 

Sutt and Mallow had not met personally since the day of the trial, two years back. Neither 
detected any change in the other, except for that subtle atmosphere about each which made it 
quite evident that the roles of ruler and defier had changed. 

Sutt took his seat without shaking hands. 

Mallow offered a cigar and said, "Mind if Jael stays? He wants a compromise earnestly. He can 
act as mediator if tempers rise." 

Sutt shrugged, "A compromise will be well for you. Upon another occasion I once asked you to 
state your terms. I presume the positions are reversed now." 

"You presume correctly." 

"Then there are my terms. You must abandon your blundering policy of economic bribery and 
trade in gadgetry, and return to the tested foreign policy of our fathers." 



"You mean conquest by missionary." 

"Exactly." 

"No compromise short of that?" 

"None." 

"Um-m-m." Mallow lit up very slowly and inhaled the tip of his cigar into a bright glow. "In 
Hardin's time, when conquest by missionary was new and radical, men like yourself opposed it. 
Now it is tried, tested, hallowed, -everything a Jorane Sutt would find well. But, tell me, how 
would you get us out of our present mess?" 

"Your present mess. I had nothing to do with it." 

"Consider the question suitably modified." 

"A strong offensive is indicated. The stalemate you seem to be satisfied with is fatal. It would be 
a confession of weakness to all the worlds of the Periphery, where the appearance of strength 
is all-important, and there's not one vulture among them that wouldn't join the assault for its 
share of the corpse. You ought to understand that. You're from Smyrno, aren't you?" 

Mallow passed over the significance of the remark. He said, "And if you beat Korell, what of the 
Empire? That is the real enemy." 

Sutt's narrow smile tugged at the comers of his mouth, "Oh, no, your records of your visit to 
Siwenna were complete. The viceroy of the Normannic Sector is interested in creating 
dissension in the Periphery for his own benefit, but only as a side issue. He isn't going to stake 
everything on an expedition to the Galaxy's rim when he has fifty hostile neighbors and an 
emperor to rebel against. I paraphrase your own words." 

"Oh, yes he might, Sutt, if he thinks we're strong enough to be dangerous. And he might think 
so, if we destroy Korell by the main force of frontal attack. We'd have to be considerably more 
subtle." 

"As for instance-" 

Mallow leaned back, "Sutt, I'll give you your chance. I don't need you, but I can use you. So I'll 
tell you what it's all about, and then you can either join me and receive a place in a coalition 
cabinet, or you can play the martyr and rot in jail." 

"Once before you tried that last trick." 

"Not very hard, Sutt. The right time has only just come. Now listen." Mallow's eyes narrowed. 

"When I first landed on Korell," he began, A bribed the Commdor with the trinkets and gadgets 
that form the trader's usual stock. At the start, that, was meant only to get us entrance into a 
steel foundry. I had no plan further than that, but in that I succeeded. I got what I wanted. But it 
was only after my visit to the Empire that I first realized exactly what a weapon I could build that 
trade into. 



"This is a Seldon crisis we're facing, Sutt, and Seldon crises are not solved by individuals but by 
historic forces. Hari Seldon, when he planned our course of future history, did not count on 
brilliant heroics but on the broad sweeps of economics and sociology. So the solutions to the 
various crises must be achieved by the forces that become available to us at the time. 

"In this case, -trade!" 

Sutt raised his eyebrows skeptically and took advantage of the pause, "I hope I am not of 
subnormal intelligence, but the fact is that your vague lecture isn't very illuminating." 

"It will become so," said Mallow. "Consider that until now the power of trade has been 
underestimated. It has been thought that it took a priesthood under our control to make it a 
powerful weapon. That is not so, and this is my contribution to the Galactic situation. Trade 
without priests! Trade alone! It is strong enough. Let us become very simple and specific. Korell 
is now at war with us. Consequently our trade with her has stopped. But, -notice that I am 
making this as simple as a problem in addition, -in the past three years she has based her 
economy more and more upon the nuclear techniques which we have introduced and which 
only we can continue to supply. Now what do you suppose will happen once the tiny nuclear 
generators begin failing, and one gadget after another goes out of commission? 

"The small household appliances go first. After a half a year of this stalemate that you abhor, a 
woman's nuclear knife won't work any more. Her stove begins failing. Her washer doesn't do a 
good job. The temperature-humidity control in her house dies on a hot summer day. What 
happens?" 

He paused for an answer, and Sutt said calmly, "Nothing. People endure a good deal in war." 

"Very true. They do. They'll send their sons out in unlimited numbers to die horribly on broken 
spaceships. They'll bear up under enemy bombardment, if it means they have to live on stale 
bread and foul water in caves half a mile deep. But it's very hard to bear up under little things 
when the patriotic uplift of imminent danger is not present. It's going to, be a stalemate. There 
will be no casualties, no bombardments, no battles. 

"There will just be a knife that won't cut, and a stove that won't cook, and a house that freezes 
in the winter. It will be annoying, and people will grumble." 

Sutt said slowly, wonderingly, "Is that what you're setting your hopes on, man? What do you 
expect? A housewives' rebellion? A Jacquerie? A sudden uprising of butchers and grocers with 
their cleavers and bread-knives shouting 'Give us back our Automatic Super-Kleeno Nuclear 
Washing Machines.'" 

"No, sir," said Mallow, impatiently, "I do not. I expect, however, a general background of 
grumbling and dissatisfaction which will be seized on by more important figures later on." 

"And what more important figures are these?" 

"The manufacturers, the factory owners, the industrialists of Korell. When two years of the 
stalemate have gone, the machines in the factories will, one by one, begin to fail. Those 
industries which we have changed from first to last with our new nuclear gadgets will find 
themselves very suddenly ruined. The heavy industries will find themselves, en masse and at a 



stroke, the owners of nothing but scrap machinery that won't work." 

"The factories ran well enough before you came there, Mallow." 

"Yes, Sutt, so they did - at about one-twentieth the profits, even if you leave out of 
consideration the cost of reconversion to the original pre-nuclear state. With the industrialist 
and financier and the average man all against him, how long will the Commdor hold out?" 

"As long as he pleases, as soon as it occurs to him to get new nuclear generators from the 
Empire." 

And Mallow laughed joyously, "You've missed, Sutt, missed as badly as the Commdor himself. 
You've missed everything, and understood nothing. Look, man, the Empire can replace 
nothing. The Empire has always been a realm of colossal resources. They've calculated 
everything in planets, in stellar systems, in whole sectors of the Galaxy. Their generators are 
gigantic because they thought in gigantic fashion. 

"But we, -we, our little Foundation, our single world almost without metallic resources, -have 
had to work with brute economy. Our generators have had to be the size of our thumb, because 
it was all the metal we could afford. We had to develop new techniques and new methods, 
-techniques and methods the Empire can't follow because they have degenerated past the 
stage where they can make any really vital scientific advance. 

"With all their nuclear shields, large enough to protect a ship, a city, an entire world; they could 
never build one to protect a single man. To supply light and heat to a city, they have motors six 
stories high, -I saw them - where ours could fit into this room. And when I told one of their 
nuclear specialists that a lead container the size of a walnut contained a nuclear generator, he 
almost choked with indignation on the spot. 

"Why, they don't even understand their own colossi any longer. The machines work from 
generation to generation automatically, and the caretakers are a hereditary caste who would be 
helpless if a single D-tube in all that vast structure burnt out. 

"The whole war is a battle between those two systems, between the Empire and the 
Foundation; between the big and the little. To seize control of a world, they bribe with immense 
ships that can make war, but lack all economic significance. We, on the other hand, bribe with 
little things, useless in war, but vital to prosperity and profits. 

"A king, or a Commdor, will take the ships and even make war. Arbitrary rulers throughout 
history have bartered their subjects' welfare for what they consider honor, and glory, and 
conquest. But it's still the little things in life that count - and Asper Argo won't stand up against 
the economic depression that will sweep all Korell in two or three years." 

Sutt was at the window, his back to Mallow and Jael. It was early evening now, and the few 
stars that struggled feebly here at the very rim of the Galaxy sparked against the background of 
the misty, wispy Lens that included the remnants of that Empire, still vast, that fought against 
them. 


Sutt said, "No. You are not the man. 



You don't believe me? 


"I mean I don't trust you. You're smooth-tongued. You befooled me properly when I thought I 
had you under proper care on your first trip to Korell. When I thought I had you cornered at the 
trial, you wormed your way out of it and into the mayor's chair by demagoguery. There is 
nothing straight about you; no motive that hasn't another behind it; no statement that hasn't 
three meanings. 

"Suppose you were a traitor. Suppose your visit to the Empire had brought you a subsidy and a 
promise of power. Your actions would be precisely what they are now. You would bring about a 
war after having strengthened the enemy. You would force the Foundation into inactivity. And 
you would advance a plausible explanation of everything, one so plausible it would convince 
everyone." 

"You mean there'll be no compromise?" asked Mallow, gently. 

"I mean you must get out, by free will or force." 

"I warned you of the only alternative to co-operation." 

Jorane Sutt's face congested with blood in a sudden access of emotion. "And I warn you, 

Hober Mallow of Smyrno, that if you arrest me, there will be no quarter. My men will stop 
nowhere in spreading the truth about you, and the common people of the Foundation will unite 
against their foreign ruler. They have a consciousness of destiny that a Smyrnian can never 
understand - and that consciousness will destroy you." 

Flober Mallow said quietly to the two guards who had entered, "Take him away. Fle's under 
arrest." 

Sutt said, "Your last chance." 

Mallow stubbed out his cigar and never looked up. 

And five minutes later, Jael stirred and said, wearily, "Well, now that you've made a martyr for 
the cause, what next?" 

Mallow stopped playing with the ash tray and looked up, "That's not the Sutt I used to know. 
Fle's a blood-blind bull. Galaxy, he hates me." 

"All the more dangerous then." 

"More dangerous? Nonsense! Fle's lost all power of judgement." 

Jael said grimly, "You're overconfident, Mallow. You're ignoring the possibility of a popular 
rebellion." 

Mallow looked up, grim in his turn, "Once and for all, Jael, there is no possibility of a popular 
rebellion." 

"You're sure of yourself!" 

"I'm sure of the Seldon crisis and the historical validity of their solutions, externally and 



internally. There are some things I didn't tell Suit right now. He tried to control the Foundation 
itself by religious forces as he controlled the outer worlds, and he failed, -which is the surest 
sign that in the Seldon scheme, religion is played out. 

"Economic control worked differently. And to paraphrase that famous Salvor Hardin quotation of 
yours, it's a poor nuclear blaster that won't point both ways. If Korell prospered with our trade, 
so did we. If Korellian factories fail without our trade; and if the prosperity of the outer worlds 
vanishes with commercial isolation; so will our factories fail and our prosperity vanish. 

"And there isn't a factory, not a trading center, not a shipping line that isn't under my control; 
that I couldn't squeeze to nothing if Sutt attempts revolutionary propaganda. Where his 
propaganda succeeds, or even looks as though it might succeed, I will make certain that 
prosperity dies. Where it fails, prosperity will continue, because my factories will remain fully 
staffed. 

"So by the same reasoning which makes me sure that the Korellians will revolt in favor of 
prosperity, I am sure we will not revolt against it. The game will be played out to its end." 

"So then," said Jael, "you're establishing a plutocracy. You're making us a land of traders and 
merchant princes. Then what of the future?" 

Mallow lifted his gloomy face, and exclaimed fiercely, "What business of mine is the future? No 
doubt Seldon has foreseen it and prepared against it. There will be other crises in the time to 
come when money power has become as dead a force as religion is now. Let my successors 
solve those new problems, as I have solved the one of today." 

KORELL-.. .And so after three years of a war which was certainly the most unfought war on 
record, the Republic of Korell surrendered unconditionally, and Hober Mallow took his place 
next to Hari Seldon and Salvor Hardin in the hearts of the people of the Foundation. 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

Isaac Asimov was born in the Soviet Union to his great surprise. He moved quickly to correct 
the situation. When his parents emigrated to the United States, Isaac (three years old at the 
time) stowed away in their baggage. He has been an American citizen since the age of eight. 

Brought up in Brooklyn, and educated in its public schools, he eventually found his way to 
Columbia University and, over the protests of the school administration, managed to annex a 
series of degrees in chemistry, up to and including a Ph.D. He then infiltrated Boston University 
and climbed the academic ladder, ignoring all cries of outrage, until he found himself Professor 
of Biochemistry. 

Meanwhile, at the age of nine, he found the love of his life (in the inanimate sense) when he 
discovered his first science-fiction magazine. By the time he was eleven, he began to write 



stories, and at eighteen, he actually worked up the nerve to submit one. It was rejected. After 
four long months of tribulation and suffering, he sold his first story and, thereafter, he never 
looked back. 

In 1941 , when he was twenty-one years old, he wrote the classic short story "Nightfall" and his 
future was assured. Shortly before that he had begun writing his robot stories, and shortly after 
that he had begun his Foundation series. 


What was left except quantity? At the present time, he has published over 260 books, 
distributed through every major division of the Dewey system of library classification, and 
shows no signs of slowing up. He remains as youthful, as lively, and as lovable as ever, and 
grows more handsome with each year. You can be sure that this is so since he has written this 
little essay himself and his devotion to absolute objectivity is notorious. 

He is married to Janet Jeppson, psychiatrist and writer, has two children by a previous 
marriage, and lives in New York City. 




ASIMOV 


FOUNDATION AND EMPIRE 


THE FOUNDATION NOVELS 


FOUNDATION AND EMPIRE 
ISAAC ASIMOV 


PROLOGUE 


Contents 





PART I THE GENERAL 


1. SEARCH FOR MAGICIANS 

2. THE MAGICIANS 

3. THE DEAD HAND 

4. THE EMPEROR 

5. THE WAR BEGINS 

6. THE FAVORITE 

7. BRIBERY 

8. TO TRANTOR 

9. ON TRANTOR 

10. THE WAR ENDS 

PART II THE MULE 

11. BRIDE AND GROOM 

12. CAPTAIN AND MAYOR 

1 3. LIEUTENANT AND CLOWN 

14. THE MUTANT 

15. THE PSYCHOLOGIST 

16. CONFERENCE 

17. THE VISI-SONOR 

1 8. FALL OF THE FOUNDATION 

1 9. START OF THE SEARCH 

20. CONSPIRATOR 

21. INTERLUDE IN SPACE 

22. DEATH ON NEOTRANTOR 

23. THE RUINS OF TRANTOR 


24. CONVERT 


25. DEATH OF A PSYCHOLOGIST 

26. END OF THE SEARCH 


PROLOGUE 


The Galactic Empire Was Falling. 

It was a colossal Empire, stretching across millions of worlds from arm-end to arm-end of the 
mighty multi-spiral that was the Milky Way. Its fall was colossal, too - and a long one, for it had 
a long way to go. 

It had been falling for centuries before one man became really aware of that fall. That man was 
Hari Seldon, the man who represented the one spark of creative effort left among the gathering 
decay. He developed and brought to its highest pitch the science of psychohistory. 

Psychohistory dealt not with man, but with man-masses. It was the science of mobs; mobs in 
their billions. It could forecast reactions to stimuli with something of the accuracy that a lesser 
science could bring to the forecast of a rebound of a billiard ball. The reaction of one man could 
be forecast by no known mathematics; the reaction of a billion is something else again. 

Hari Seldon plotted the social and economic trends of the time, sighted along the curves and 
foresaw the continuing and accelerating fall of civilization and the gap of thirty thousand years 
that must elapse before a struggling new Empire could emerge from the ruins. 

It was too late to stop that fall, but not too late to narrow the gap of barbarism. Seldon 
established two Foundations at "opposite ends of the Galaxy" and their location was so 
designed that in one short millennium events would knit and mesh so as to force out of them a 
stronger, more permanent, more benevolent Second Empire. 

Foundation (Gnome Press, 1951) has told the story of one of those Foundations during the first 
two centuries of life. 

It began as a settlement of physical scientists on Terminus, a planet at the extreme end of one 
of the spiral arms of the Galaxy. Separated from the turmoil of the Empire, they worked as 
compilers of a universal compendium of knowledge, the Encyclopedia Galactica, unaware of 
the deeper role planned for them by the already-dead Seldon, 

As the Empire rotted, the outer regions fell into the hands of independent "kings." The 
Foundation was threatened by them. However, by playing one petty ruler against another, 
under the leadership of their first mayor, Salvor Hardin, they maintained a precarious 
independence. As sole possessors, of nuclear power among worlds which were losing their 
sciences and falling back on coal and oil, they even established an ascendancy. The 
Foundation became the "religious" center of the neighboring kingdoms. 


Slowly, the Foundation developed a trading economy as the Encyclopedia receded into the 
background. Their Traders, dealing in nuclear gadgets which not even the Empire in its heyday 
could have duplicated for compactness, penetrated hundreds of light-years through the 
Periphery. 

Under Hober Mallow, the first of the Foundation's Merchant Princes, they developed the 
techniques of economic warfare to the point of defeating the Republic of Korell, even though 
that world was receiving support from one of the outer provinces of what was left of the Empire. 

At the end of two hundred years, the Foundation was the most powerful state in the Galaxy, 
except for the remains of the Empire, which, concentrated in the inner third of the Milky Way, 
still controlled three quarters of the population and wealth of the Universe. 

It seemed inevitable that the next danger the Foundation would have to face was the final lash 
of the dying Empire. 

The way must he cleared for the battle of Foundation and Empire. 


PART I 

THE GENERAL 


1. SEARCH FOR MAGICIANS 

BEL RIOSE .... In his relatively short career, Riose earned the title of "The Last of the Imperials'' 
and earned It well. A study of his campaigns reveals him to be the equal of Peurifoy in strategic 
ability and his superior perhaps in his ability to handle men. That he was born in the days of the 
decline of Empire made it all but impossible for him to equal Peurifoy's record as a conqueror. 
Yet he had his chance when, the first of the Empire's generals to do so, he faced the 
Foundation squarely.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA* 

*AII quotations from the Encyclopedia Galactica here reproduced are taken from the 1 1 6th 
Edition published in 1020 F.E. by the Encyclopedia Galactica Publishing Co., Terminus, with 
permission of the publishers. 

Bel Riose traveled without escort, which is not what court etiquette prescribes for the head of a 
fleet stationed in a yet-sullen stellar system on the Marches of the Galactic Empire. 

But Bel Riose was young and energetic - energetic enough to be sent as near the end of the 
universe as possible by an unemotional and calculating court - and curious besides. Strange 
and improbable tales fancifully-repeated by hundreds and murkily-known to thousands intrigued 





the last faculty; the possibility of a military venture engaged the other two. The combination was 
overpowering. 

He was out of the dowdy ground-car he had appropriated and at the door of the fading mansion 
that was his destination. He waited. The photonic eye that spanned the doorway was alive, but 
when the door opened it was by hand. 

Bel Riose smiled at the old man. "I am Riose-" 

"I recognize you." The old man remained stiffly and unsurprised in his place. "Your business?" 

Riose withdrew a step in a gesture of submission. "One of peace. If you are Ducem Barr, I ask 
the favor of conversation." 

Ducem Barr stepped aside and in the interior of the house the walls glowed into life, The 
general entered into daylight. 

He touched the wall of the study, then stared at his fingertips. "You have this on Siwenna?" 

Barr smiled thinly. "Not elsewhere, I believe. I keep this in repair myself as well as I can. I must 
apologize for your wait at the door. The automatic device registers the presence of a visitor but 
will no longer open the door." 

"Your repairs fall short?" The general's voice was faintly mocking. 

"Parts are no longer available. If you will sit, sir. You drink tea?" 

"On Siwenna? My good sir, it is socially impossible not to drink it here." 

The old patrician retreated noiselessly with a slow bow that was part of the ceremonious legacy 
left by the aristocracy of the last century's better days. 

Riose looked after his host's departing figure, and his studied urbanity grew a bit uncertain at 
the edges. His education had been purely military; his experience likewise. He had, as the 
cliche, has it, faced death many times; but always death of a very familiar and tangible nature, 
Consequently, there is no inconsistency in the fact that the idolized lion of the Twentieth Fleet 
felt chilled in the suddenly musty atmosphere of an ancient room. 

The general recognized the small black-ivroid boxes that lined the shelves to be books. Their 
titles were unfamiliar. He guessed that the large structure at one end of the room was the 
receiver that transmuted the books into sight-and-sound on demand. He had never seen one in 
operation; but he had heard of them. 

Once he had been told that long before, during the golden ages when the Empire had been 
co-extensive with the entire Galaxy, nine houses out of every ten had such receivers - and 
such rows of books. 

But there were borders to watch now; books were for old men. And half the stories told about 
the old days were mythical anyway. More than half. 

The tea arrived, and Riose seated himself. Ducem Barr lifted his cup. "To your honor." 



"Thank you. To yours." 

Ducem Barr said deliberately, "You are said to be young. Thirty-five?" 

"Near enough. Thirty-four." 

"In that case," said Barr, with soft emphasis, "I could not begin better than by informing you 
regretfully that I am not in the possession of love charms, potions, or philtres. Nor am I in the 
least capable of influencing the favors of any young lady as may appeal to you." 

"I have no need of artificial aids in that respect, sir." The complacency undeniably present in the 
general's voice was stirred with amusement. "Do you receive many requests for such 
commodities?" 

"Enough. Unfortunately, an uninformed public tends to confuse scholarship with magicianry, 
and love life seems to be that factor which requires the largest quantity of magical tinkering." 

"And so would seem most natural. But I differ. I connect scholarship with nothing but the means 
of answering difficult questions." 

The Siwennian considered somberly, "You may be as wrong as they!" 

"That may turn out or not." The young general set down his cup in its flaring sheath and it 
refilled. He dropped the offered flavor-capsule into it with a small splash. "Tell me then, 
patrician, who are the magicians? The real ones." 

Barr seemed startled at a title long-unused. He said, "There are no magicians." 

"But people speak of them. Siwenna crawls with the tales of them. There are cults being built 
about them. There is some strange connection between it and those groups among your 
countrymen who dream and drivel of ancient days and what they call liberty and autonomy. 
Eventually the matter might become a danger to the State." 

The old man shook his head. "Why ask me? Do you smell rebellion, with myself at the head?" 

Riose shrugged, "Never. Never. Oh, it is not a thought completely ridiculous. Your father was 
an exile in his day; you yourself a patriot and a chauvinist in yours. It is indelicate in me as a 
guest to mention it, but my business here requires it. And yet a conspiracy now? I doubt it. 
Siwenna has had the spirit beat out of it these three generations." 

The old man replied with difficulty, "I shall be as indelicate a host as you a guest. I shall remind 
you that once a viceroy thought as you did of the spiritless Siwennians. By the orders of that 
viceroy my father became a fugitive pauper, my brothers martyrs, and my sister a suicide. Yet 
that viceroy died a death sufficiently horrible at the hands of these same slavish Siwennians." 

"Ah, yes, and there you touch nearly on something I could wish to say. For three years the 
mysterious death of that viceroy has been no mystery to me. There was a young soldier of his 
personal guard whose actions were of interest. You were that soldier, but there is no need of 
details, I think." 


Barr was quiet. "None. What do you propose? 



"That you answer my questions." 

"Not under threats. I am old enough for life not to mean particularly overmuch." 

"My good sir, these are hard times," said Riose, with meaning, "and you have children and 
friends. You have a country for which you have mouthed phrases of love and folly in the past. 
Come, if I should decide to use force, my aim would not be so poor as to strike you." 

Barr said coldly, "What do you want?" 

Riose held the empty cup as he spoke. "Patrician, listen to me. These are days when the most 
successful soldiers are those whose function is to lead the dress parades that wind through the 
imperial palace grounds on feast days and to escort the sparkling pleasure ships that carry His 
Imperial Splendor to the summer planets. I ... I am a failure. I am a failure at thirty-four, and I 
shall stay a failure. Because, you see, I like to fight. 

"That's why they sent me here. I'm too troublesome at court. I don't fit in with the etiquette. I 
offend the dandies and the lord admirals, but I'm too good a leader of ships and men to be 
disposed of shortly be being marooned in space. So Siwenna is the substitute. It's a frontier 
world; a rebellious and a barren province. It is far away, far enough away to satisfy all. 

"And so I moulder. There are no rebellions to stamp down, and the border viceroys do not 
revolt lately, at least, not since His Imperial Majesty's late father of glorious memory made an 
example of Mountel of Paramay." 

"A strong Emperor," muttered Barr. 

"Yes, and we need more of them. He is my master; remember that. These are his interests I 
guard." 

Barr shrugged unconcernedly. "How does all this relate to the subject?" 

"I'll show you in two words. The magicians I've mentioned come from beyond-out there beyond 
the frontier guards, where the stars are scattered thinly-" 

"'Where the stars are scattered thinly,'" quoted Barr, '"And the cold of space seeps in."' 

"Is that poetry?" Riose frowned. Verse seemed frivolous at the moment. "In any case, they're 
from the Periphery - from the only quarter where I am free to fight for the glory of the Emperor." 

"And thus serve His Imperial Majesty's interests and satisfy your own love of a good fight." 

"Exactly. But I must know what I fight; and there you can help." 

"How do you know?" 

Riose nibbled casually at a cakelet. "Because for three years I have traced every rumor, every 
myth, every breath concerning the magicians - and of all the library of information I have 
gathered, only two isolated facts are unanimously agreed upon, and are hence certainly true. 
The first is that the magicians come from the edge of the Galaxy opposite Siwenna; the second 
is that your father once met a magician, alive and actual, and spoke with him." 



The aged Siwennian stared unblinkingly, and Riose continued, "You had better tell me what 
you know-" 

Barr said thoughtfully, "It would be interesting to tell you certain things. It would be a 
psychohistoric experiment of my own." 

"What kind of experiment?" 

"Psychohistoric." The old man had an unpleasant edge to his smile. Then, crisply, "You'd better 
have more tea. I'm going to make a bit of a speech." 

He leaned far back into the soft cushions of his chair. The wall-lights had softened to a 
pink-ivory glow, which mellowed even the soldier's hard profile. 

Ducem Barr began, "My own knowledge is the result of two accidents; the accidents of being 
born the son of my father, and of being born the native of my country. It begins over forty years 
ago, shortly after the great Massacre, when my father was a fugitive in the forests of the South, 
while I was a gunner in the viceroy's personal fleet. This same viceroy, by the way, who had 
ordered the Massacre, and who died such a cruel death thereafter." 

Barr smiled grimly, and continued, "My father was a Patrician of the Empire and a Senator of 
Siwenna. His name was Onum Barr." 

Riose interrupted impatiently, "I know the circumstances of his exile very well. You needn't 
elaborate upon it." 

The Siwennian ignored him and proceeded without deflection. "During his exile a wanderer 
came upon him; a merchant from the edge of the Galaxy; a young man who spoke a strange 
accent, knew nothing of recent Imperial history, and who was protected by an individual 
force-shield." 

"An individual force-shield?" Riose glared. "You speak extravagance. What generator could be 
powerful enough to condense a shield to the size of a single man? By the Great Galaxy, did he 
carry five thousand myria-tons of nuclear power-source about with him on a little wheeled 
gocart?" 

Barr said quietly, "This is the magician of whom you hear whispers, stories and myths. The 
name 'magician' is not lightly earned. He carried no generator large enough to be seen, but not 
the heaviest weapon you can carry in your hand would have as much as creased the shield he 
bore." 

"Is this all the story there is? Are the magicians born of maunderings of an old man broken by 
suffering and exile?" 

"The story of the magicians antedated even my father, sir. And the proof is more concrete. After 
leaving my father, this merchant that men call a magician visited a Tech-man at the city to 
which my father had guided him, and there he left a shield-generator of the type he wore. That 
generator was retrieved by my father after his return from exile upon the execution of the 
bloody viceroy. It took a long time to find- 



"The generator hangs on the wall behind you, sir. It does not work. It never worked but for the 
first two days; but if you'll look at it, you will see that no one in the Empire ever designed it." 

Bel Riose reached for the belt of linked metal that clung to the curved wall. It came away with a 
little sucking noise as the tiny adhesion-field broke at the touch of his hand. The ellipsoid at the 
apex of the belt held his attention. It was the size of a walnut. 

"This-" he said. 

"Was the generator," nodded Barr. "But it was the generator. The secret of its workings are 
beyond discovery now. Sub-electronic investigations have shown it to be fused into a single 
lump of metal and not all the most careful study of the diffraction patterns have sufficed to 
distinguish the discrete parts that had existed before fusion." 

"Then your 'proof still lingers on the frothy border of words backed by no concrete evidence." 

Barr shrugged. "You have demanded my knowledge of me and threatened its extortion by 
force. If you choose to meet it with skepticism, what is that to me? Do you want me to stop?" 

"Go on!" said the general, harshly. 

"I continued my father's researches after he died, and then the second accident I mentioned 
came to help me, for Siwenna was well known to Hari Seldon." 

"And who is Hari Seldon?" 

"Hari Seldon was a scientist of the reign of the Emperor, Daluben IV. He was a psychohistorian; 
the last and greatest of them all. He once visited Siwenna, when Siwenna was a great 
commercial center, rich in the arts and sciences." 

"Hmph," muttered Riose, sourly, "where is the stagnant planet that does not claim to have been 
a land of overflowing wealth in older days?" 

"The days I speak of are the days of two centuries ago, when the Emperor yet ruled to the 
uttermost star; when Siwenna was a world of the interior and not a semi-barbarian border 
province. In those days, Hari Seldon foresaw the decline of Imperial power and the eventual 
barbarization of the entire Galaxy." 

Riose laughed suddenly. "He foresaw that? Then he foresaw wrong, my good scientist. I 
suppose you call yourself that. Why, the Empire is more powerful now than it has been in a 
millennium. Your old eyes are blinded by the cold bleakness of the border. Come to the inner 
worlds some day; come to the warmth and the wealth of the center." 

The old man shook his head somberly. "Circulation ceases first at the outer edges. It will take a 
while yet for the decay to reach the heart. That is, the apparent, obvious-to-all decay, as distinct 
from the inner decay that is an old story of some fifteen centuries." 

"And so this Hari Seldon foresaw a Galaxy of uniform barbarism," said Riose, good-humoredly. 
"And what then, eh?" 


So he established two foundations at the extreme opposing ends of the Galaxy - Foundations 



of the best, and the youngest, and the strongest, there to breed, grow, and develop. The worlds 
on which they were placed were chosen carefully; as were the times and the surroundings. All 
was arranged in such a way that the future as foreseen by the unalterable mathematics of 
psychohistory would involve their early isolation from the main body of Imperial civilization and 
their gradual growth into the germs of the Second Galactic Empire - cutting an inevitable 
barbarian interregnum from thirty thousand years to scarcely a single thousand." 

"And where did you find out all this? You seem to know it in detail." 

"I don't and never did," said the patrician with composure. "It is the painful result of the piecing 
together of certain evidence discovered by my father and a little more found by myself. The 
basis is flimsy and the superstructure has been romanticized into existence to fill the huge 
gaps. But I am convinced that it is essentially true." 

"You are easily convinced." 

"Am I? It has taken forty years of research." 

"Hmph. Forty years! I could settle the question in forty days. In fact, I believe I ought to. It would 
be - different." 

"And how would you do that?" 

"In the obvious way. I could become an explorer. I could find this Foundation you speak of and 
observe with my eyes. You say there are two?" 

"The records speak of two. Supporting evidence has been found only for one, which is 
understandable, for the other is at the extreme end of the long axis of the Galaxy." 

"Well, we'll visit the near one." The general was on his feet, adjusting his belt. 

"You know where to go?" asked Barr. 

"In a way. In the records of the last viceroy but one, he whom you murdered so effectively, 
there are suspicious tales of outer barbarians. In fact, one of his daughters was given in 
marriage to a barbarian prince. I'll find my way." 

Fie held out a hand. "I thank you for your hospitality." 

Ducem Barr touched the hand with his fingers and bowed formally. "Your visit was a great 
honor." 

"As for the information you gave me," continued Bel Riose, "I'll know how to thank you for that 
when I return." 


Ducem Barr followed his guest submissively to the outer door and said quietly to the 
disappearing ground-car, "And if you return." 



2. THE MAGICIANS 

FOUNDATION ... With forty years of expansion behind them, the Foundation faced the menace 
of Riose. The epic days of Hardin and Mallow had gone and with them were gone a certain 
hard daring and resolution.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

There were four men in the room, and the room was set apart where none could approach. The 
four men looked at each other quickly, then lengthily at the table that separated them. There 
were four bottles on the table and as many full glasses, but no one had touched them. 

And then the man nearest the door stretched out an arm and drummed a slow, padding rhythm 
on the table. 

He said, "Are you going to sit and wonder forever? Does it matter who speaks first?" 

"Speak you first, then," said the big man directly opposite. "You're the one who should be the 
most worried." 

Sennett Forell chuckled with noiseless nonhumor. "Because you think I'm the richest. Well - Or 
is it that you expect me to continue as I have started. I don't suppose you forget that it was my 
own Trade Fleet that captured this scout ship of theirs." 

"You had the largest fleet," said a third, "and the best pilots; which is another way of saying you 
are the richest. It was a fearful risk; and would have been greater for one of us." 

Sennett Forell chuckled again. "There is a certain facility in risk-taking that I inherit from my 
father. After all, the essential point in running a risk is that the returns justify it. As to which, 
witness the fact that the enemy ship was isolated and captured without loss to ourselves or 
warning to the others." 

That Forell was a distant collateral relative of the late great Hober Mallow was recognized 
openly throughout the Foundation. That he was Mallow's illegitimate son was accepted quietly 
to just as wide an extent. 

The fourth man blinked his little eyes stealthily. Words crept out from between thin lips. "It is 
nothing to sleep over in fat triumph, this grasping of little ships. Most likely, it will but anger that 
young man further." 

"You think he needs motives?" questioned Forell, scornfully. 

"I do, and this might, or will, save him the vexation of having to manufacture one." The fourth 
man spoke slowly, "Hober Mallow worked otherwise. And Salvor Hardin. They let others take 
the uncertain paths of force, while they maneuvered surely and quietly." 

Forell shrugged. "This ship has proved its value. Motives are cheap and we have sold this one 
at a profit." There was the satisfaction of the born Trader in that. He continued, "The young 
man is of the old Empire." 

"We knew that," said the second man, the big one, with rumbling discontent. 



"We suspected that," corrected Forell, softly. "If a man comes with ships and wealth, with 
overtures of friendliness, and with offers of trade, it is only sensible to refrain from antagonizing 
him, until we are certain that the profitable mask is not a face after all. But now-" 

There was a faint whining edge to the third man's voice as he spoke. "We might have been 
even more careful. We might have found out first. We might have found out before allowing him 
to leave. It would have been the truest wisdom." 

"That has been discussed and disposed of," said Forell. Fie waved the subject aside with a 
flatly final gesture. 

"The government is soft," complained the third man. "The mayor is an idiot." 

The fourth man looked at the other three in turn and removed the stub of a cigar from his 
mouth. Fie dropped it casually into the slot at his right where it disappeared with a silent flash of 
disruption. 

Fie said sarcastically, "I trust the gentleman who last spoke is speaking through habit only. We 
can afford to remember here that we are the government." 

There was a murmur of agreement. 

The fourth man's little eyes were on the table. "Then let us leave government policy alone. This 
young man ... this stranger might have been a possible customer. There have been cases. All 
three of you tried to butter him into an advance contract. We have an agreement - a 
gentleman's agreement - against it, but you tried." 

"So did you," growled the second man. 

I know it," said the fourth, calmly. 

"Then let's forget what we should have done earlier," interrupted Forell impatiently, "and 
continue with what we should do now. In any case, what if we had imprisoned him, or killed 
him, what then? We are not certain of his intentions even yet, and at the worst, we could not 
destroy an Empire by snipping short one man's life. There might be navies upon navies waiting 
just the other side of his nonreturn." 

"Exactly," approved the fourth man. "Now what did you get out of your captured ship? I'm too 
old for all this talking." 

"It can be told in a few enough words," said Forell, grimly. "Fle's an Imperial general or 
whatever rank corresponds to that over there. Fle's a young man who has proved his military 
brilliance - so I am told - and who is the idol of his men. Quite a romantic career. The stories 
they tell of him are no doubt half lies, but even so it makes him out to be a type of wonder 
man." 

"Who are the 'they'?" demanded the second man. 

"The crew of the captured ship. Look, I have all their statements recorded on micro-film, which I 
have in a secure place. Later on, if you wish, you can see them. You can talk to the men 
yourselves, if you think it necessary. I've told you the essentials." 



"How did you get it out of them? How do you know they're telling the truth?" 

Forell frowned. "I wasn't gentle, good sir. I knocked them about, drugged them crazy, and used 
the Probe unmercifully. They talked. You can believe them." 

"In the old days," said the third man, with sudden irrelevance, "they would have used pure 
psychology. Painless, you know, but very sure. No chance of deceit." 

"Well, there is a good deal they had in the old days," said Forell, dryly. "These are the new 
days." 

"But," said the fourth man, "what did he want here, this general, this romantic wonder-man?" 
There was a dogged, weary persistence about him. 

Forell glanced at him sharply. "You think he confides the details of state policy to his crew? 
They didn't know. There was nothing to get out of them in that respect, and I tried, Galaxy 
knows." 

"Which leaves us-" 

"To draw our own conclusions, obviously." Forell's fingers were tapping quietly again. "The 
young man is a military leader of the Empire, yet he played the pretense of being a minor 
princeling of some scattered stars in an odd comer of the Periphery. That alone would assure 
us that his real motives are such as it would not benefit him to have us know. Combine the 
nature of his profession with the fact that the Empire has already subsidized one attack upon us 
in my father's time, and the possibilities become ominous. That first attack failed. I doubt that 
the Empire owes us love for that." 

"There is nothing in your findings," questioned the fourth man guardedly, "that makes for 
certainty? You are withholding nothing?" 

Forell answered levelly, "I can't withhold anything. From here on there can be no question of 
business rivalry. Unity is forced upon us." 

"Patriotism?" There was a sneer in the third man's thin voice. 

"Patriotism be damned," said Forell quietly. "Do you think I give two puffs of nuclear emanation 
for the future Second Empire? Do you think I'd risk a single Trade mission to smooth its path? 
But - do you suppose Imperial conquest will help my business or yours? If the Empire wins, 
there will be a sufficient number of yearning carrion crows to crave the rewards of battle." 

"And we're the rewards," added the fourth man, dryly. 

The second man broke his silence suddenly, and shifted his bulk angrily, so that the chair 
creaked under him. "But why talk of that. The Empire can't win, can it? There is Seldon's 
assurance that we will form the Second Empire in the end. This is only another crisis. There 
have been three before this." 

"Only another crisis, yes!" Forell brooded. "But - in the case of the first two, we had Salvor 
Hardin to guide us; in the third, there was Hober Mallow. Whom have we now?" 



He looked at the others somberly and continued, "Seldon's rules of psychohistory on which it is 
so comforting to rely probably have as one of the contributing variables, a certain normal 
initiative on the part of the people of the Foundation themselves. Seldon's laws help those who 
help themselves." 

"The times make the man," said the third man. "There's another proverb for you." 

"You can't count on that, not with absolute assurance," grunted Forell. "Now the way it seems 
to me is this. If this is the fourth crisis, then Seldon has foreseen it. If he has, then it can be 
beaten, and there should be a way of doing it. 

"Now The Empire is stronger than we; it always has been. But this is the first time we are in 
danger of its direct attack, so that strength becomes terribly menacing. If it can be beaten, it 
must be once again as in all past crises by a method other than pure force. We must find the 
weak side of our enemy and attack it there." 

"And what is that weak side?" asked the fourth man. "Do you intend advancing a theory?" 

"No. That is the point I'm leading up to. Our great leaders of the past always saw the weak 
points of their enemies and aimed at that. But now-" 

There was a helplessness in his voice, and for a moment none volunteered a comment. 

Then the fourth man said, "We need spies." 

Forell turned to him eagerly. "Right! I don't know when the Empire will attack. There may be 
time." 

"Hober Mallow himself entered the Imperial dominions," suggested the second man. 

But Forell shook his head. "Nothing so direct. None of us are precisely youthful; and all of us 
are rusty with red-tape and administrative detail. We need young men that are in the field 
now-" 

"The independent traders?" asked the fourth man. 

And Forell nodded his, head and whispered, "If there is yet time-" 


3. THE DEAD HAND 


Bel Riose interrupted his annoyed stridings to look up hopefully when his aide entered. "Any 
word of the Starlet ?" 

"None. The scouting party has quartered space, but the instruments have detected nothing. 
Commander Yume has reported that the Fleet is ready for an immediate attack in retaliation." 

The general shook his head. "No, not for a patrol ship. Not yet. Tell him to double - Wait! I'll 
write out the message. Have it coded and transmitted by tight beam." 

He wrote as he talked and thrust the paper at the waiting officer. "Has the Siwennian arrived 



yet?" 

"Not yet." 

"Well, see to it that he is brought in here as soon as he does arrive." 

The aide saluted crisply and left. Riose resumed his caged stride. 

When the door opened a second time, it was Ducem Barr that stood on the threshold. Slowly, 
in the footsteps of the ushering aide, he stepped into the garish room whose ceiling was an 
ornamented holographic model of the Galaxy, and in the center of which Bel Riose stood in 
field uniform. 

"Patrician, good day!" The general pushed forward a chair with his foot and gestured the aide 
away with a "That door is to stay closed till I open it." 

He stood before the Siwennian, legs apart, hand grasping wrist behind his back, balancing 
himself slowly, thoughtfully, on the balls of his feet. 

Then, harshly, "Patrician, are you a loyal subject of the Emperor?" 

Barr, who had maintained an indifferent silence till then, wrinkled a noncommittal brow. "I have 
no cause to love Imperial rule." 

"Which is a long way from saying that you would be a traitor." 

"True. But the mere act of not being a traitor is also a long way from agreeing to be an active 
helper." 

"Ordinarily also true. But to refuse your help at this point," said Riose, deliberately, "will be 
considered treason and treated as such." 

Barr's eyebrows drew together. "Save your verbal cudgels for your subordinates. A simple 
statement of your needs and wants will suffice me here." 

Riose sat down and crossed his legs. "Barr, we had an earlier discussion half a year ago." 
"About your magicians?" 

"Yes. You remember what I said I would do." 

Barr nodded. His arms rested limply in his lap. "You were going to visit them in their haunts, 
and you've been away these four months. Did you find them?" 

"Find them? That I did," cried Riose. His lips were stiff as he spoke. It seemed to require effort 
to refrain from grinding molars. "Patrician, they are not magicians; they are devils. It is as far 
from belief as the outer galaxies from here. Conceive it! It is a world the size of a handkerchief, 
of a fingernail; with resources so petty, power so minute, a population so microscopic as would 
never suffice the most backward worlds of the dusty prefects of the Dark Stars. Yet with that, a 
people so proud and ambitious as to dream quietly and methodically of Galactic rule. 

"Why, they are so sure of themselves that they do not even hurry. They move slowly, 



phlegmatically; they speak of necessary centuries. They swallow worlds at leisure; creep 
through systems with dawdling complacence. 

"And they succeed. There is no one to stop them. They have built up a filthy trading community 
that curls its tentacles about the systems further than their toy ships dare reach. For parsecs, 
their Traders - which is what their agents call themselves - penetrate." 

Ducem Barr interrupted the angry flow. "How much of this information is definite; and how much 
is simply fury?" 

The soldier caught his breath and grew calmer. "My fury does not blind me. I tell you I was in 
worlds nearer to Siwenna than to the Foundation, where the Empire was a myth of the 
distance, and where Traders were living truths. We ourselves were mistaken for Traders." 

"The Foundation itself told you they aimed at Galactic dominion?" 

"Told me!" Riose was violent again. "It was not a matter of telling me. The officials said nothing. 
They spoke business exclusively. But I spoke to ordinary men. I absorbed the ideas of the 
common folk; their 'manifest destiny,' their calm acceptance of a great future. It is a thing that 
can't be hidden; a universal optimism they don't even try to hide." 

The Siwennian openly displayed a certain quiet satisfaction. "You will notice that so far it would 
seem to bear out quite accurately my reconstruction of events from the paltry data on the 
subject that I have gathered." 

"It is no doubt," replied Riose with vexed sarcasm, "a tribute to your analytical powers. It is also 
a hearty and bumptious commentary on the growing danger to the domains of His Imperial 
Majesty." 

Barr shrugged his unconcern, and Riose leaned forward suddenly, to seize the old man's 
shoulders and stare with curious gentleness into his eyes. 

He said, "Now, patrician, none of that. I have no desire to be barbaric. For my part, the legacy 
of Siwennian hostility to the Imperium is an odious burden, and one which I would do 
everything in my power to wipe out. But my province is the military and interference in civil 
affairs is impossible. It would bring about my recall and ruin my usefulness at once. You see 
that? I know you see that. Between yourself and myself then, let the atrocity of forty years ago 
be repaid by your vengeance upon its author and so forgotten. I need your help. I frankly admit 
it." 

There was a world of urgency in the young man's voice, but Ducem Barr's head shook gently 
and deliberately in a negative gesture. 

Riose said pleadingly, "You don't understand, patrician, and I doubt my ability to make you. I 
can't argue on your ground. You're the scholar, not I. But this I can tell you. Whatever you think 
of the Empire, you will admit its great services. Its armed forces have committed isolated 
crimes, but in the main they have been a force for peace and civilization. It was the Imperial 
navy that created the Pax Imperium that ruled over all the Galaxy for thousands of years. 
Contrast the millennia of peace under the Sun-and-Spaceship of the Empire with the millennia 
of interstellar anarchy that preceded it. Consider the wars and devastations of those old days 



and tell me if, with all its faults, the Empire is not worth preserving. 

"Consider," he drove on forcefully, "to what the outer fringe of the Galaxy is reduced in these 
days of their breakaway and independence, and ask yourself if for the sake of a petty revenge 
you would reduce Siwenna from its position as a province under the protection of a mighty 
Navy to a barbarian world in a barbarian Galaxy, all immersed in its fragmentary independence 
and its common degradation and misery." 

"Is it so bad - so soon?" murmured the Siwennian. 

"No," admitted Riose. "We would be safe ourselves no doubt, were our lifetimes quadrupled. 

But it is for the Empire I fight; that, and a military tradition which is something for myself alone, 
and which I can not transfer to you. It is a military tradition built on the Imperial institution which 
I serve." 

"You are getting mystical, and I always find it difficult to penetrate another person's mysticism." 
"No matter. You understand the danger of this Foundation." 

"It was I who pointed out what you call the danger before ever you headed outward from 
Siwenna." 

"Then you realize that it must be stopped in embryo or perhaps not at all. You have known of 
this Foundation before anyone had heard of it. You know more about it than anyone else in the 
Empire. You probably know how it might best be attacked; and you can probably forewarn me 
of its countermeasures. Come, let us be friends." 

Ducem Barr rose. Fie said flatly, "Such help as I could give you means nothing. So I will make 
you free of it in the face of your strenuous demand." 

"I will be the judge of its meaning." 

"No, I am serious. Not all the might of the Empire could avail to crush this pygmy world." 

"Why not?" Bel Riose's eyes glistened fiercely. "No, stay where you are. I'll tell you when you 
may leave. Why not? If you think I underestimate this enemy I have discovered, you are wrong. 
Patrician," he spoke reluctantly, "I lost a ship on my return. I have no proof that it fell into the 
hands of the Foundation; but it has not been located since and were it merely an accident, its 
dead hulk should, certainly have been found along the route we took. It is not an important loss 
- less than the tenth part of a fleabite, but it may mean that the Foundation has already opened 
hostilities. Such eagerness and such disregard for consequences might mean secret forces of 
which I know nothing. Can you help me then by answering a specific question? What is their 
military power?" 

"I haven't any notion." 

"Then explain yourself on your own terms. Why do you say the Empire can not defeat this small 
enemy?" 

The Siwennian seated himself once more and looked away from Riose's fixed glare. Fie spoke 
heavily, "Because I have faith in the principles of psychohistory. It is a strange science. It 



reached mathematical maturity with one man, Hari Seldon, and died with him, for no man since 
has been capable of manipulating its intricacies. But in that short period, it proved itself the 
most powerful instrument ever invented for the study of humanity. Without pretending to predict 
the actions of individual humans, it formulated definite laws capable of mathematical analysis 
and extrapolation to govern and predict the mass action of human groups." 

"So-" 

"It was that psychohistory which Seldon and the group he worked with applied in full force to 
the establishment of the Foundation. The place, time, and conditions all conspire 
mathematically and so, inevitably, to the development of a Second Galactic Empire." 

Riose's voice trembled with indignation. "You mean that this art of his predicts that I would 
attack the Foundation and lose such and such a battle for such and such a reason? You are 
trying to say that I am a silly robot following a predetermined course into destruction." 

"No," replied the old patrician, sharply. "I have already said that the science had nothing to do 
with individual actions. It is the vaster background that has been foreseen." 

"Then we stand clasped tightly in the forcing hand of the Goddess of Historical Necessity." 

"Of Psyc/7ohistorical Necessity," prompted Barr, softly. 

"And if I exercise my prerogative of freewill? If I choose to attack next year, or not to attack at 
all? Flow pliable is the Goddess? Flow resourceful?" 

Barr shrugged. "Attack now or never; with a single ship, or all the force in the Empire; by 
military force or economic pressure; by candid declaration of war or by treacherous ambush. 

Do whatever you wish in your fullest exercise of freewill. You will still lose." 

"Because of Hari Seldon's dead hand?" 

"Because of the dead hand of the mathematics of human behavior that can neither be stopped, 
swerved, nor delayed." 

The two faced each other in deadlock, until the general stepped back. 

Fie said simply, "I'll take that challenge. It's a dead hand against a living will." 


4. THE EMPEROR 

CLEON II commonly called "The Great. " The last strong Emperor of the First Empire, he is 
important for the political and artistic renaissance that took place during his long reign. He is 
best known to romance, however, for his connection with Bel Riose, and to the common man, 
he is simply "Riose's Emperor. " It is important not to allow events of the last year of his reign to 
overshadow forty years of... 


ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 



Cleon II was Lord of the Universe. Cleon II also suffered from a painful and undiagnosed 
ailment. By the queer twists of human affairs, the two statements are not mutually exclusive, 
nor even particularly incongruous. There have been a wearisomely large number of precedents 
in history. 

But Cleon II cared nothing for such precedents. To meditate upon a long list of similar cases 
would not ameliorate personal suffering an electron's worth. It soothed him as little to think that 
where his great-grandfather had been the pirate ruler of a dust-speck planet, he himself slept in 
the pleasure palace of Ammenetik the Great, as heir of a line of Galactic rulers stretching 
backward into a tenuous past. It was at present no source of comfort to him that the efforts of 
his father had cleansed the realm of its leprous patches of rebellion and restored it to the peace 
and unity it had enjoyed under Stanel VI; that, as a consequence, in the twenty-five years of his 
reign, not one cloud of revolt had misted his burnished glory. 

The Emperor of the Galaxy and the Lord of All whimpered as he lolled his head backward into 
the invigorating plane of force about his pillows. It yielded in a softness that did not touch, and 
at the pleasant tingle, Cleon relaxed a bit. He sat up with difficulty and stared morosely at the 
distant walls of the grand chamber. It was a bad room to be alone in. It was too big. All the 
rooms were too big. 

But better to be alone during these crippling bouts than to endure the prinking of the courtiers, 
their lavish sympathy, their soft, condescending dullness. Better to be alone than to watch 
those insipid masks behind which spun the tortuous speculations on the chances of death and 
the fortunes of the succession. 

His thoughts hurried him. There were his three sons; three straight-backed youths full of 
promise and virtue. Where did they disappear on these bad days? Waiting, no doubt. Each 
watching the other; and all watching him. 

He stirred uneasily. And now Brodrig craved audience. The low-born, faithful Brodrig; faithful 
because he was hated with a unanimous and cordial hatred that was the only point of 
agreement between the dozen cliques that divided his court. 

Brodrig - the faithful favorite, who had to be faithful, since unless he owned the fastest 
speed-ship in the Galaxy and took to it the day of the Emperor's death, it would be the 
radiation-chamber the day after. 

Cleon II touched the smooth knob on the arm of his great divan, and the huge door at the end 
of the room dissolved to transparency. 

Brodrig advanced along the crimson carpet, and knelt to kiss the Emperor's limp hand. 

"Your health, sire?" asked the Privy Secretary in a low tone of becoming anxiety. 

"I live," snapped the Emperor with exasperation, "if you can call it life where every scoundrel 
who can read a book of medicine uses me as a blank and receptive field for his feeble 
experiments. If there is a conceivable remedy, chemical, physical, or nuclear, which has not yet 
been tried, why then, some learned babbler from the far comers of the realm will arrive 
tomorrow to try it. And still another newly-discovered book, or forgery morelike, will be used as 



authority. 

"By my father's memory," he rumbled savagely, "it seems there is not a biped extant who can 
study a disease before his eyes with those same eyes. There is not one who can count a 
pulse-beat without a book of the ancients before him. I'm sick and they call it 'unknown.' The 
fools! If in the course of millennia, human bodies learn new methods of falling askew, it remains 
uncovered by the studies of the ancients and uncurable forevermore. The ancients should be 
alive now, or I then." 

The Emperor ran down to a low-breathed curse while Brodrig waited dutifully. Cleon II said 
peevishly, "How many are waiting outside?" 

He jerked his head in the direction of the door. 

Brodrig said patiently, "The Great Hall holds the usual number." 

"Well, let them wait. State matters occupy me. Have the Captain of the Guard announce it. Or 
wait, forget the state matters. Just have it announced I hold no audience, and let the Captain of 
the Guard look doleful. The jackals among them may betray themselves." The Emperor 
sneered nastily. 

"There is a rumor, sire," said Brodrig, smoothly, "that it is your heart that troubles you." 

The Emperor's smile was little removed from the previous sneer. "It will hurt others more than 
myself if any act prematurely on that rumor. But what is it you want. Let's have this over." 

Brodrig rose from his kneeling posture at a gesture of permission and said, "It concerns 
General Bel Riose, the Military Governor of Siwenna." 

"Riose?" Cleon II frowned heavily. "I don't place him. Wait, is he the one who sent that quixotic 
message some months back? Yes, I remember. He panted for permission to enter a career of 
conquest for the glory of the Empire and Emperor." 

"Exactly, sire." 

The Emperor laughed shortly. "Did you think I had such generals left me, Brodrig? He seems to 
be a curious atavism. What was the answer? I believe you took care of it." 

"I did, sire. He was instructed to forward additional information and to take no steps involving 
naval action without further orders from the Imperium." 

"Hmp. Safe enough. Who is this Riose? Was he ever at court?" 

Brodrig nodded and his mouth twisted ever so little. "He began his career as a cadet in the 
Guards ten years back. He had part in that affair off the Lemul Cluster." 

"The Lemul Cluster? You know, my memory isn't quite - Was that the time a young soldier 
saved two ships of the line from a head-on collision by ... uh ... something or other?" He waved 
a hand impatiently. "I don't remember the details. It was something heroic." 

"Riose was that soldier. He received a promotion for it," Brodrig said dryly, "and an appointment 



to field duty as captain of a ship." 

"And now Military Governor of a border system and still young. Capable man, Brodrig!" 

"Unsafe, sire. He lives in the past. He is a dreamer of ancient times, or rather, of the myths of 
what ancient times used to be. Such men are harmless in themselves, but their queer lack of 
realism makes them fools for others." He added, "His men, I understand, are completely under 
his control. He is one of your popular generals." 

"Is he?" the Emperor mused. "Well, come, Brodrig, I would not wish to be served entirely by 
incompetents. They certainly set no enviable standard for faithfulness themselves." 

"An incompetent traitor is no danger. It is rather the capable men who must be watched." 

"You among them, Brodrig?" Cleon II laughed and then grimaced with pain. "Well, then, you 
may forget the lecture for the while. What new development is there in the matter of this young 
conqueror? I hope you haven't come merely to reminisce." 

"Another message, sire, has been received from General Riose." 