a new generation of hard, little youngsters born to the soil. There was the great day when he 
was chosen leader of the Group and for the first time since his eighteenth birthday he did not 
shave and saw the first stubble of his Leader's Beard appear. 

And now the Galaxy might intrude and put an end to the brief idyll of isolation- 

The ship landed. He watched wordlessly as the port opened. Four emerged, cautious and 
watchful. There were three men, varied, old, young, thin and beaked. And a woman striding 
among them like an equal. His hand left the two glassy black tufts of his beard as he stepped 
forward. 

He gave the universal gesture of peace. Both hands were before him; hard, calloused palms 
upward. 

The young man approached two steps and duplicated the gesture. "I come in peace." 

The accent was strange, but the words were understandable, and welcome. He replied, deeply, 
"In peace be it. You are welcome to the hospitality of the Group. Are you hungry? You shall eat. 
Are you thirsty? You shall drink." 

Slowly, the reply came, "We thank you for your kindness, and shall bear good report of your 
Group when we return to our world." 

A queer answer, but good. Behind him, the men of the Group were smiling, and from the 
recesses of the surrounding structures, the women emerged. 

In his own quarters, he removed the locked, mirror-walled box from its hidden place, and 



offered each of the guests the long, plump cigars that were reserved for great occasions. 

Before the woman, he hesitated. She had taken a seat among the men. The strangers 
evidently allowed, even expected, such effrontery. Stiffly, he offered the box. 

She accepted one with a smile, and drew in its aromatic smoke, with all the relish one could 
expect. Lee Senter repressed a scandalized emotion. 

The stiff conversation, in advance of the meal, touched politely upon the subject of fanning on 
Trantor. 

It was the old man who asked, "What about hydroponics? Surely, for such a world as Trantor, 
hydroponics would be the answer." 

Senter shook his head slowly. He felt uncertain. His knowledge was the unfamiliar matter of the 
books he had read, "Artificial fanning in chemicals, I think? No, not on Trantor. This 
hydroponics requires a world of industy - for instance, a great chemical industry. And in war or 
disaster, when industry breaks down, the people starve. Nor can all foods be grown artificially. 
Some lose their food value. The soil is cheaper, still better - always more dependable." 

"And your food supply is sufficient?" 

"Sufficient; perhaps monotonous. We have fowl that supply eggs, and milk-yielders for our dairy 
products - but our meat supply rests upon our foreign trade." 

"Trade." The young man seemed roused to sudden interest. "You trade then. But what do you 
export?" 

"Metal," was the curt answer. "Look for yourself. We have an infinite supply, ready processed. 
They come from Neotrantor with ships, demolish an indicated area-increasing our growing 
space - and leave us in exchange meat, canned fruit, food concentrates, farm machinery and 
so on. They carry off the metal and both sides profit." 

They feasted on bread and cheese, and a vegetable stew that was unreservedly delicious. It 
was over the dessert of frosted fruit, the only imported item on the menu, that, for the first time, 
the Outlanders became other than mere guests. The young man produced a map of Trantor. 

Calmly, Lee Senter studied it. He listened - and said gravely, "The University Grounds are a 
static area. We farmers do not grow crops on it. We do not, by preference, even enter it. It is 
one of our few relics of another time we would keep undisturbed. " 

"We are seekers after knowledge. We would disturb nothing. Our ship would be our hostage." 
The old man offered this - eagerly, feverishly. 

"I can take you there then," said Senter. 

That night the strangers slept, and that night Lee Senter sent a message to Neotrantor. 



24. CONVERT 

The thin life of Trantor trickled to nothing when they entered among the wide-spaced buildings 
of the University grounds. There was a solemn and lonely silence over it. 

The strangers of the Foundation knew nothing of the swirling days and nights of the bloody 
Sack that had left the University untouched. They knew nothing of the time after the collapse of 
the Imperial power, when the students, with their borrowed weapons, and their pale-faced 
inexperienced bravery, formed a protective volunteer army to protect the central shrine of the 
science of the Galaxy. They knew nothing of the Seven Days Fight, and the armistice that kept 
the University free, when even the Imperial palace clanged with the boots of Gilmer and his 
soldiers, during the short interval of their rule. 

Those of the Foundation, approaching for the first time, realized only that in a world of transition 
from a gutted old to a strenuous new this area was a quiet, graceful museum-piece of ancient 
greatness. 

They were intruders in a sense. The brooding emptiness rejected them. The academic 
atmosphere seemed still to live and to stir angrily at the disturbance. 

The library was a deceptively small building which broadened out vastly underground into a 
mammoth volume of silence and reverie. Ebling Mis paused before the elaborate murals of the 
reception room. 

Fie whispered - one had to whisper here: "I think we passed the catalog rooms back a way. I'll 
stop there." 

His forehead was flushed, his hand trembling, "I mustn't be disturbed, Toran. Will you bring my 
meals down to me?" 

"Anything you say. We'll do all we can to help. Do you want us to work under you-" 

"No. I must be alone-" 

"You think you will get what you want." 

And Ebling Mis replied with a soft certainty, "I know I will!" 

Toran and Bayta came closer to "setting up housekeeping" in normal fashion than at any time 
in their year of married life. It was a strange sort of "housekeeping." They lived in the middle of 
grandeur with an inappropriate simplicity. Their food was drawn largely from Lee Senter's farm 
and was paid for in the little nuclear gadgets that may be found on any Trader's ship. 

Magnifico taught himself how to use the projectors in the library reading room, and sat over 
adventure novels and romances to the point where he was almost as forgetful of meals and 
sleep as was Ebling Mis. 

Ebling himself was completely buried. Fie had insisted on a hammock being slung up for him in 
the Psychology Reference Room. His face grew thin and white. His vigor of speech was lost 
and his favorite curses had died a mild death. There were times when the recognition of either 



Toran or Bayta seemed a struggle. 

He was more himself with Magnifico who brought him his meals and often sat watching him for 
hours at a time, with a queer, fascinated absorption, as the aging psychologist transcribed 
endless equations, cross-referred to endless book-films, scurried endlessly about in a wild 
mental effort towards an end he alone saw. 

Toran came upon her in the darkened room, and said sharply, "Bayta!" 

Bayta started guiltily. "Yes? You want me, Torie?" 

"Sure I want you. What in Space are you sitting there for? You've been acting all wrong since 
we got to Trantor. What's the matter with you?" 

"Oh, Torie, stop," she said, wearily. 

And "Oh, Torie, stop!" he mimicked impatiently. Then, with sudden softness, "Won't you tell me 
what's wrong, Bay? Something's bothering you." 

"No! Nothing is, Torie. If you keep on just nagging and nagging, you'll have me mad. I'm just — 
thinking." 

"Thinking about what?" 

"About nothing. Well, about the Mule, and Haven, and the Foundation, and everything. About 
Ebling Mis and whether he'll find anything about the Second Foundation, and whether it will 
help us when he does find it - and a million other things. Are you satisfied?" Her voice was 
agitated. 

"If you're just brooding, do you mind stopping? It isn't pleasant and it doesn't help the situation." 
Bayta got to her feet and smiled weakly. "All right. I'm happy. See, I'm smiling and jolly. " 
Magnifico's voice was an agitated cry outside. "My lady-" 

"What is it? Come-" 

Bayta's voice choked off sharply when the opening door framed the large, hard-faced- 
"Pritcher," cried Toran. 

Bayta gasped, "Captain! How did you find us?" 

Han Pritcher stepped inside. His voice was clear and level, and utterly dead of feeling, "My rank 
is colonel now - under the Mule." 

"Under the ... Mule!" Toran's voice trailed off. They formed a tableau there, the three. 

Magnifico stared wildly and shrank behind Toran. Nobody stopped to notice him. 

Bayta said, her hands trembling in each other's tight grasp, "You are arresting us? You have 
really gone over to them?" 



The colonel replied quickly, "I have not come to arrest you. My instructions make no mention of 
you. With regard to you, I am free, and I choose to exercise our old friendship, if you will let 
me." 

Toran's face was a twisted suppression of fury, "How did you find us? You were in the Filian 
ship, then? You followed us?" 

The wooden lack of expression on Pritcher's face might have flickered in embarrassment. "I 
was on the Filian ship! I met you in the first place ... well ... by chance." 

"It is a chance that is mathematically impossible." 

"No. Simply rather improbable, so my statement will have to stand. In any case, you admitted to 
the. Filians - there is, of course, no such nation as Filia actually - that you were heading for the 
Trantor sector, and since the Mule already had his contacts upon Neotrantor, it was easy to 
have you detained there. Unfortunately, you got away before I arrived, but not long before. I 
had time to have the farms on Trantor ordered to report your arrival. It was done and I am here. 
May I sit down? I come in friendliness, believe me. 

He sat. Toran bent his head and thought futilely. With a numbed lack of emotion, Bayta 
prepared tea. 

Toran looked up harshly. "Well, what are you waiting for - colonel? What's your friendship? If 
it's not arrest, what is it then? Protective custody? Call in your men and give your orders." 

Patiently, Pritcher shook his head. "No, Toran. I come of my own will to speak to you, to 
persuade you of the uselessness of what you are doing. If I fail I shall leave. That is all." 

"That is all? Well, then peddle your propaganda, give us your speech, and leave. I don't want 
any tea, Bayta." 

Pritcher accepted a cup, with a grave word of thanks. He looked at Toran with a clear strength 
as he sipped lightly. Then he said, "The Mule is a mutant. He can not be beaten in the very 
nature of the mutation-" 

"Why? What is the mutation?" asked Toran, with sour humor. "I suppose you'll tell us now, eh?" 

"Yes, I will. Your knowledge won't hurt him. You see - he is capable of adjusting the emotional 
balance of human beings. It sounds like a little trick, but it's quite unbeatable." 

Bayta broke in, "The emotional balance?" She frowned, "Won't you explain that? I don't quite 
understand." 

"I mean that it is an easy matter for him to instill into a capable general, say, the emotion of 
utter loyalty to the Mule and complete belief in the Mule's victory. His generals are emotionally 
controlled. They can not betray him; they can not weaken - and the control is permanent. His 
most capable enemies become his most faithful subordinates, The warlord of Kalgan 
surrenders his planet and becomes his viceroy for the Foundation." 

"And you," added Bayta, bitterly, "betray your cause and become Mule's envoy to Trantor. I 
see!" 



"I haven't finished. The Mule's gift works in reverse even more effectively. Despair is an 
emotion! At the crucial moment, keymen on the Foundation - keymen on Haven - despaired. 
Their worlds fell without too much struggle." 

"Do you mean to say," demanded Bayta, tensely, "that the feeling I had in the Time Vault was 
the Mule juggling my emotional control." 

"Mine, too. Everyone's. How was it on Haven towards the end?" 

Bayta turned away. 

Colonel Pritcher continued earnestly, "As it works for worlds, so it works for individuals. Can 
you fight a force which can make you surrender willingly when it so desires; can make you a 
faithful servant when it so desires?" 

Toran said slowly, "How do I know this is the truth?" 

"Can you explain the fall of the Foundation and of Haven otherwise? Can you explain my 
conversion otherwise? Think, man! What have you - or I - or the whole Galaxy accomplished 
against the Mule in all this time? What one little thing?" 

Toran felt the challenge, "By the Galaxy, I can!" With a sudden touch of fierce satisfaction, he 
shouted, "Your wonderful Mule had contacts with Neotrantor you say that were to have 
detained us, eh? Those contacts are dead or worse. We killed the crown prince and left the 
other a whimpering idiot. The Mule did not stop us there, and that much has been undone." 

"Why, no, not at all. Those weren't our men. The crown prince was a wine-soaked mediocrity. 
The other man, Commason, is phenomenally stupid. He was a power on his world but that 
didn't prevent him from being vicious, evil, and completely incompetent. We had nothing really 
to do with them. They were, in a sense, merely feints-" 

"It was they who detained us, or tried." 

"Again, no. Commason had a personal slave - a man called Inchney. Detention was his policy. 
He is old, but will serve our temporary purpose. You would not have killed him, you see." 

Bayta whirled on him. She had not touched her own tea. "But, by your very statement, your own 
emotions have been tampered with. You've got faith and belief in the Mule, an unnatural, a 
diseased faith in the Mule. Of what value are your opinions? You've lost all power of objective 
thought." 

"You are wrong." Slowly, the colonel shook his head. "Only my emotions are fixed. My reason 
is as it always was. It may be influenced in a certain direction by my conditioned emotions, but 
it is not forced. And there are some things I can see more clearly now that I am freed of my 
earlier emotional trend. 

"I can see that the Mule's program is an intelligent and worthy one. In the time since I have 
been - converted, I have followed his career from its start seven years ago. With his mutant 
mental power, he began by winning over a condottiere and his band. With that - and his power 
- he won a planet. With that - and his power - he extended his grip until he could tackle the 



warlord of Kalgan. Each step followed the other logically. With Kalgan in his pocket, he had a 
first-class fleet, and with that - and his power - he could attack the Foundation. 

"The Foundation is the key. It is the greatest area of industrial concentration in the Galaxy, and 
now that the nuclear techniques of the Foundation are in his hands, he is the actual master of 
the Galaxy. With those techniques - and his power - he can force the remnants of the Empire 
to acknowledge his rule, and eventually - with the death of the old emperor, who is mad and 
not long for this world - to crown him emperor. Fie will then have the name as well as the fact. 
With that - and his power - where is the world in the Galaxy that can oppose him? 

"In these last seven years, he has established a new Empire. In seven years, in other words, he 
will have accomplished what all Seldon's psychohistory could not have done in less than an 
additional seven hundred. The Galaxy will have peace and order at last. 

"And you could not stop it - any more than you could stop a planet's rush with your shoulders." 

A long silence followed Pritcher's speech. What remained of his tea had grown cold. Fie 
emptied his cup, filled it again, and drained it slowly. Toran bit viciously at a thumbnail. Bayta's 
face was cold, and distant, and white. 

Then Bayta said in a thin voice, "We are not convinced. If the Mule wishes us to be, let him 
come here and condition us himself. You fought him until the last moment of your conversion, I 
imagine, didn't you?" 

"I did," said Colonel Pritcher, solemnly. 

"Then allow us the same privilege." 

Colonel Pritcher arose. With a crisp air of finality, he said, "Then I leave. As I said earlier, my 
mission at present concerns you in no way. Therefore, I don't think it will be necessary to report 
your presence here. That is not too great a kindness. If the Mule wishes you stopped, he no 
doubt has other men assigned to the job, and you will be stopped. But, for what it is worth, I 
shall not contribute more than my requirement." 

"Thank you," said Bayta faintly. 

"As for Magnifico. Where is he? Come out, Magnifico, I won't hurt you-" 

"What about him?" demanded Bayta, with sudden animation. 

"Nothing. My instructions make no mention of him, either. I have heard that he is searched for, 
but the Mule will find him when the time suits him. I shall say nothing. Will you shake hands?" 

Bayta shook her head. Toran glared his frustrated contempt. 

There was the slightest lowering of the colonel's iron shoulders. Fie strode to the door, turned 
and said: 

"One last thing. Don't think I am not aware of the source of your stubbornness. It is known that 
you search for the Second Foundation. The Mule, in his time, will take his measures. Nothing 
will help you - But I knew you in other times; perhaps there is something in my conscience that 



urged me to this; at any rate, I tried to help you and remove you from the final danger before it 
was too late. Good-by." 

He saluted sharply - and was gone. 

Bayta turned to a silent Toran, and whispered, "They even know about the Second 
Foundation." 

In the recesses of the library, Ebling Mis, unaware of all, crouched under the one spark of light 
amid the murky spaces and mumbled triumphantly to himself. 


25. DEATH OF A PSYCHOLOGIST 

After that there were only two weeks left to the life of Ebling Mis. 

And in those two weeks, Bayta was with him three times. The first time was on the night after 
the evening upon which they saw Colonel Pritcher. The second was one week later. And the 
third was again a week later - on the last day - the day Mis died. 

First, there was the night of Colonel Pritcher's evening, the first hour of which was spent by a 
stricken pair in a brooding, unmerry merry-go-round. 

Bayta said, "Torie, let's tell Ebling." 

Toran said dully, "Think he can help?" 

"We're only two. We've got to take some of the weight off. Maybe he can help." 

Toran said, "He's changed. He's lost weight. He's a little feathery; a little woolly." His fingers 
groped in air, metaphorically. "Sometimes, I don't think he'll help us muchever. Sometimes, I 
don't think anything will help." 

"Don't!" Bayta's voice caught and escaped a break, "Torie, don't! When you say that, I think the 
Mule's getting us. Let's tell Ebling, Torie - now!" 

Ebling Mis raised his head from the long desk, and bleared at them as they approached. His 
thinning hair was scuffed up, his lips made sleepy, smacking sounds. 

"Eh?" he said. "Someone want me?" 

Bayta bent to her knees, "Did we wake you? Shall we leave?" 

"Leave? Who is it? Bayta? No, no, stay! Aren't there chairs? I saw them-" His finger pointed 
vaguely. 

Toran pushed two ahead of him. Bayta sat down and took one of the psychologist's flaccid 
hands in hers. "May we talk to you, Doctor?" She rarely used the title. 

"Is something wrong?" A little sparkle returned to his abstracted eyes. His sagging cheeks 
regained a touch of color. "Is something wrong?" 



Bayta said, "Captain Pritcher has been here. Let me talk, Torie. You remember Captain 
Pritcher, Doctor?" 

"Yes- Yes-" His fingers pinched his lips and released them. "Tall man. Democrat." 

"Yes, he. He's discovered the Mule's mutation. He was here, Doctor, and told us." 

"But that is nothing new. The Mule's mutation is straightened out." In honest astonishment, 
"Haven't I told you? Have I forgotten to tell you?" 

"Forgotten to tell us what?" put in Toran, quickly. 

"About the Mule's mutation, of course. He tampers with emotions. Emotional control! I haven't 
told you? Now what made me forget?" Slowly, he sucked in his under lip and considered. 

Then, slowly, life crept into his voice and his eyelids lifted wide, as though his sluggish brain 
had slid onto a well-greased single track. He spoke in a dream, looking between the two 
listeners rather than at them. "It is really so simple. It requires no specialized knowledge. In the 
mathematics of psychohistory, of course, it works out promptly, in a third-level equation 
involving no more - Never mind that. It can be put into ordinary words - roughly - and have it 
make sense, which isn't usual with psychohistorical phenomena. 

"Ask yourselves - What can upset Hari Seldon's careful scheme of history, eh?" He peered 
from one to the other with a mild, questioning anxiety. "What were Seldon's original 
assumptions? First, that there would be no fundamental change in human society over the next 
thousand years. 

"For instance, suppose there were a major change in the Galaxy's technology, such as finding 
a new principle for the utilization of energy, or perfecting the study of electronic neurobiology. 
Social changes would render Seldon's original equations obsolete. But that hasn't happened, 
has it now?" 

"Or suppose that a new weapon were to be invented by forces outside the Foundation, capable 
of withstanding all the Foundation's armaments. That might cause a ruinous deviation, though 
less certainly. But even that hasn't happened. The Mule's Nuclear Field-Depressor was a 
clumsy weapon and could be countered. And that was the only novelty he presented, poor as it 
was. 

"But there was a second assumption, a more subtle one! Seldon assumed that human reaction 
to stimuli would remain constant. Granted that the first assumption held true, then the second 
must have broken down! Some factor must be twisting and distorting the emotional responses 
of human beings or Seldon couldn't have failed and the Foundation couldn't have fallen. And 
what factor but the Mule? 

"Am I right? Is there a flaw in the reasoning?" 

Bayta's plump hand patted his gently. "No flaw, Ebling." 

Mis was joyful, like a child. "This and more comes so easily. I tell you I wonder sometimes what 
is going on inside me. I seem to recall the time when so much was a mystery to me and now 



things are so clear. Problems are absent. I come across what might be one, and somehow, 
inside me, I see and understand. And my guesses, my theories seem always to be borne out. 
There's a drive in me ... always onward ... so that I can't stop ... and I don't want to eat or sleep 
... but always go on ... and on ... and on-" 

His voice was a whisper; his wasted, blue-veined hand rested tremblingly upon his forehead. 
There was a frenzy in his eyes that faded and went out. 

He said more quietly, "Then I never told you about the Mule's mutant powers, did I? But then ... 
did you say you knew about it?" 

"It was Captain Pritcher, Ebling," said Bayta. "Remember?" 

"He told you?" There was a tinge of outrage in his tone. "But how did he find out?" 

"He's been conditioned by the Mule. He's a colonel now, a Mule's man. He came to advise us 
to surrender to the Mule, and he told us - what you told us." 

"Then the Mule knows we're here? I must hurry - Where's Magnifico? Isn't he with you?" 
"Magnifico's sleeping," said Toran, impatiently. "It's past midnight, you know." 

"It is? Then - Was I sleeping when you came in?" 

"You were," said Bayta decisively, "and you're not going back to work, either. You're getting into 
bed. Come on, Torie, help me. And you stop pushing at me, Ebling, because it's just your luck I 
don't shove you under a shower first. Pull off his shoes, Torie, and tomorrow you come down 
here and drag him out into the open air before he fades completely away. Look at you, Ebling, 
you'll be growing cobwebs. Are you hungry?" 

Ebling Mis shook his head and looked up from his cot in a peevish confusion. "I want you to 
send Magnifico down tomorrow," he muttered. 

Bayta tucked the sheet around his neck. "You'll have me down tomorrow, with washed clothes. 
You're going to take a good bath, and then get out and visit the farm and feel a little sun on 
you." 

"I won't do it," said Mis weakly. "You hear me? I'm too busy." 

His sparse hair spread out on the pillow like a silver fringe about his head. His voice was a 
confidential whisper. "You want that Second Foundation, don't you?" 

Toran turned quickly and squatted down on the cot beside him. "What about the Second 
Foundation, Ebling?" 

The psychologist freed an arm from beneath the sheet and his tired fingers clutched at Toran's 
sleeve. "The Foundations were established at a great Psychological Convention presided over 
by Hari Seldon. Toran, I have located the published minutes of that Convention. Twenty-five fat 
films. I have already looked through various summaries." 


Well? 



"Well, do you know that it is very easy to find from them the exact location of the First 
Foundation, if you know anything at all about psychohistory. It is frequently referred to, when 
you understand the equations. But Toran, nobody mentions the Second Foundation, There has 
been no reference to it anywhere." 

Toran's eyebrows pulled into a frown. "It doesn't exist?" 

"Of course it exists," cried Mis, angrily, "who said it didn't? But there's less talk of it. Its 
significance - and all about it - are better hidden, better obscured. Don't you see? It's the more 
important of the two. It's the critical one; the one that counts! And I've got the minutes of the 
Seldon Convention. The Mule hasn't won yet-" 

Quietly, Bayta turned the lights down. "Go to sleep!" 

Without speaking, Toran and Bayta made their way up to their own quarters. 

The next day, Ebling Mis bathed and dressed himself, saw the sun of Trantor and felt the wind 
of Trantor for the last time. At the end of the day he was once again submerged in the gigantic 
recesses of the library, and never emerged thereafter. 

In the week that followed, life settled again into its groove. The sun of Neotrantor was a calm, 
bright star in Trantor's night sky. The farm was busy with its spring planting. The University 
grounds were silent in their desertion. The Galaxy seemed empty. The Mule might never have 
existed. 

Bayta was thinking that as she watched Toran light his cigar carefully and look up at the 
sections of blue sky visible between the swarming metal spires that encircled the horizon. 

"It's a nice day," he said. 

"Yes, it is. Flave you everything mentioned on the list, Torie?" 

"Sure. Half pound butter, dozen eggs, string beans - Got it all down here, Bay. I'll have it right." 

"Good. And make sure the vegetables are of the last harvest and not museum relics. Did you 
see Magnifico anywhere, by the way?" 

"Not since breakfast. Guess he's down with Ebling, watching a book-film." 

"All right. Don't waste any time, because I'll need the eggs for dinner." 

Toran left with a backward smile and a wave of the hand. 

Bayta turned away as Toran slid out of sight among the maze of metal. She hesitated before 
the kitchen door, about-faced slowly, and entered the colonnade leading to the elevator that 
burrowed down into the recesses. 

Ebling Mis was there, head bent down over the eyepieces of the projector, motionless, a 
frozen, questing body. Near him sat Magnifico, screwed up into a chair, eyes sharp and 
watching - a bundle of slatty limbs with a nose emphasizing his scrawny face. 

Bayta said softly, "Magnifico-" 



Magnifico scrambled to his feet. His voice was an eager whisper. "My lady!" 

"Magnifico," said Bayta, "Toran has left for the farm and won't be back for a while. Would you 
be a good boy and go out after him with a message that I'll write for you?" 

"Gladly, my lady. My small services are but too eagerly yours, for the tiny uses you can put 
them to." 

She was alone with Ebling Mis, who had not moved. Firmly, she placed her hand upon his 
shoulder. "Ebling-" 

The psychologist started, with a peevish cry, "What is it?" He wrinkled his eyes. "Is it you, 
Bayta? Where's Magnifico?" 

"I sent him away. I want to be alone with you for a while." She enunciated her words with 
exaggerated distinctness. "I want to talk to you, Ebling." 

The psychologist made a move to return to his projector, but her hand on his shoulder was firm. 
She felt the bone under the sleeve clearly. The flesh seemed to have fairly melted away since 
their arrival on Trantor. His face was thin, yellowish, and bore a half-week stubble. His 
shoulders were visibly stooped, even in a sitting position. 

Bayta said, "Magnifico isn't bothering you, is he, Ebling? He seems to be down here night and 
day." 

"No, no, no! Not at all. Why, I don't mind him. He is silent and never disturbs me. Sometimes he 
carries the films back and forth for me; seems to know what I want without my speaking. Just 
let him be." 

"Very well - but, Ebling, doesn't he make you wonder? Do you hear me, Ebling? Doesn't he 
make you wonder?" 

She jerked a chair close to his and stared at him as though to pull the answer out of his eyes. 
Ebling Mis shook his head. "No. What do you mean?" 

"I mean that Colonel Pritcher and you both say the Mule can condition the emotions of human 
beings. But are you sure of it? Isn't Magnifico himself a flaw in the theory?" 

There was silence. 

Bayta repressed a strong desire to shake the psychologist. "What's wrong with you, Ebling? 
Magnifico was the Mule's clown. Why wasn't he conditioned to love and faith? Why should he, 
of all those in contact with the Mule, hate him so. 

"But ... but he was conditioned. Certainly, Bay!" He seemed to gather certainty as he spoke. 

"Do you suppose that the Mule treats his clown the way he treats his generals? He needs faith 
and loyalty in the latter, but in his clown he needs only fear. Didn't you ever notice that 
Magnifico's continual state of panic is pathological in nature? Do you suppose it is natural for a 
human being to be as frightened as that all the time? Fear to such an extent becomes comic. It 
was probably comic to the Mule - and helpful, too, since it obscured what help we might have 



gotten earlier from Magnifico." 

Bayta said, "You mean Magnifico's information about the Mule was false?" 

"it was misleading. It was colored by pathological fear. The Mule is not the physical giant 
Magnifico thinks. He is more probably an ordinary man outside his mental powers. But if it 
amused him to appear a superman to poor Magnifico-" The psychologist shrugged. "In any 
case, Magnifico's information is no longer of importance." 

"What is, then?" 

But Mis shook himself loose and returned to his projector. 

"What is, then?" she repeated. "The Second Foundation?" 

The psychologist's eyes jerked towards her. "Have I told you anything about that? I don't 
remember telling you anything. I'm not ready yet. What have I told you?" 

"Nothing," said Bayta, intensely. "Oh, Galaxy, you've told me nothing, but I wish you would 
because I'm deathly tired. When will it be over?" 

Ebling Mis peered at her, vaguely rueful, "Well, now, my ... my dear, I did not mean to hurt you. 

I forget sometimes ... who my friends are. Sometimes it seems to me that I must not talk of all 
this. There's a need for secrecy - but from the Mule, not from you, my dear." He patted her 
shoulder with a weak amiability. 

She said, "What about the Second Foundation?" 

His voice was automatically a whisper, thin and sibilant. "Do you know the thoroughness with 
which Seldon covered his traces? The proceedings of the Seldon Convention would have been 
of no use to me at a as little as a month ago, before this strange insight came. Even now, it 
seems - tenuous. The papers put out by the Convention are often apparently unrelated; always 
obscure. More than once I wondered if the members of the Convention, themselves, knew all 
that was in Seldon's mind. Sometimes I think he used the Convention only as a gigantic front, 
and single-handed erected the structure-" 

"Of the Foundations?" urged Bayta. 

"Of the Second Foundation! Our Foundation was simple. But the Second Foundation was only 
a name. It was mentioned, but if there was any elaboration, it was hidden deep in the 
mathematics. There is still much I don't even begin to understand, but for seven days, the bits 
have been clumping together into a vague picture. 

"Foundation Number One was a world of physical scientists. It represented a concentration of 
the dying science of the Galaxy under the conditions necessary to make it live again. No 
psychologists were included. It was a peculiar distortion, and must have had a purpose. The 
usual explanation was that Seldon's psychohistory worked best where the individual working 
units - human beings - had no knowledge of what was coming, and could therefore react 
naturally to all situations. Do you follow me, my dear-" 


Yes, doctor. 



"Then listen carefully. Foundation Number Two was a world of mental scientists. It was the 
mirror image of our world. Psychology, not physics, was king." Triumphantly. "You see?" 

"I don't." 

"But think, Bayta, use your head. Hari Seldon knew that his psychohistory could predict only 
probabilities, and not certainties. There was always a margin of error, and as time passed that 
margin increases in geometric progression. Seldon would naturally guard as well as he could 
against it. Our Foundation was scientifically vigorous. It could conquer armies and weapons. It 
could pit force against force. But what of the mental attack of a mutant such as the Mule?" 

"That would be for the psychologists of the Second Foundation!" Bayta felt excitement rising 
within her. 

"Yes, yes, yes! Certainly!" 

"But they have done nothing so far." 

"Flow do you know they haven't?" 

Bayta considered that, "I don't. Do you have evidence that they have?" 

"No. There are many factors I know nothing of. The Second Foundation could not have been 
established full-grown, any more than we were. We developed slowly and grew in strength; 
they must have also. The stars know at what stage their strength is now. Are they strong 
enough to fight the Mule? Are they aware of the danger in the first place? Flave they capable 
leaders?" 

"But if they follow Seldon's plan, then the Mule must be beaten by the Second Foundation." 

"Ah," and Ebling Mis's thin face wrinkled thoughtfully, "is it that again? But the Second 
Foundation was a more difficult job than the First. Its complexity is hugely greater; and 
consequently so is its possibility of error. And if the Second Foundation should not beat the 
Mule, it is bad - ultimately bad. It is the end, may be, of the human race as we know it." 

"No. 

"Yes. If the Mule's descendants inherit his mental powers - You see? Flomo sapiens could not 
compete. There would be a new dominant race - a new aristocracy - with homo sapiens 
demoted to slave labor as an inferior race. Isn't that so?" 

"Yes, that is so." 

"And even if by some chance the Mule did not establish a dynasty, he would still establish a 
distorted new Empire upheld by his personal power only. It would die with his death; the Galaxy 
would be left where it was before he came, except that there would no longer be Foundations 
around which a real and healthy Second Empire could coalesce. It would mean thousands of 
years of barbarism. It would mean no end in sight." 


What can we do? Can we warn the Second Foundation? 



"We must, or they may go under through ignorance, which we can not risk. But there is no way 
of warning them." 

"No way?" 

"I don't know where they are located. They are 'at the other end of the Galaxy' but that is all, 
and there are millions of worlds to choose from." 

"But, Ebling, don't they say?" She pointed vaguely at the films that covered the table. 

"No, they don't. Not where I can find it - yet. The secrecy must mean something. There must 
be a reason-" A puzzled expression returned to his eyes. "But I wish you'd leave. I have 
wasted enough time, and it's growing short - it's growing short." 

He tore away, petulant and frowning. 

Magnifico's soft step approached. "Your husband is home, my lady." 

Ebling Mis did not greet the clown. He was back at his projector. 

That evening Toran, having listened, spoke, "And you think he's really right, Bay? You think he 
isn't-" He hesitated. 

"He is right, Torie. He's sick, I know that. The change that's come over him, the loss in weight, 
the way he speaks - he's sick. But as soon as the subject of the Mule or the Second 
Foundation, or anything he is working on, comes up, listen to him. He is lucid and clear as the 
sky of outer space. He knows what he's talking about. I believe him." 

"Then there's hope." It was half a question. 

"I ... I haven't worked it out. Maybe! Maybe not! I'm carrying a blaster from now on." The 
shiny-barreled weapon was in her hand as she spoke. "Just in case, Torie, just in case." 

"In case what?" 

Bayta laughed with a touch of hysteria, "Never mind. Maybe I'm a little crazy, too - like Ebling 
Mis." 

Ebling Mis at that time had seven days to live, and the seven days slipped by, one after the 
other, quietly. 

To Toran, there was a quality of stupor about them. The warming days and the dull silence 
covered him with lethargy. All life seemed to have lost its quality of action, and changed into an 
infinite sea of hibernation. 

Mis was a hidden entity whose burrowing work produced nothing and did not make itself 
known. He had barricaded himself. Neither Toran nor Bayta could see him. Only Magnifico's 
go-between characteristics were evidence of his existence. Magnifico, grown silent and 
thoughtful, with his tiptoed trays of food and his still, watchful witness in the gloom. 

Bayta was more and more a creature of herself. The vivacity died, the self-assured competence 
wavered. She, too, sought her own worried, absorbed company, and once Toran bad come 



upon her, fingering her blaster. She had put it away quickly, forced a smile. 

"What are you doing with it, Bay?" 

"Holding it. Is that a crime?" 

"You'll blow your fool head off." 

"Then I'll blow it off. Small loss!" 

Married life had taught Toran the futility of arguing with a female in a dark-brown mood. He 
shrugged, and left her. 

On the last day, Magnifico scampered breathless into their presence. He clutched at them, 
frightened. "The learned doctor calls for you. He is not well." 

And he wasn't well. He was in bed, his eyes unnaturally large, unnaturally bright. He was dirty, 
unrecognizable. 

"Ebling!" cried Bayta. 

"Let me speak," croaked the psychologist, lifting his weight to a thin elbow with an effort. "Let 
me speak. I am finished; the work I pass on to you. I have kept no notes; the scrap-figures I 
have destroyed. No other must know. All must remain in your minds." 

"Magnifico," said Bayta, with rough directness. "Go upstairs!" 

Reluctantly, the clown rose and took a backward step. His sad eyes were on Mis. 

Mis gestured weakly, "He won't matter; let him stay. Stay, Magnifico." 

The clown sat down quickly. Bayta gazed at the floor. 

Slowly, slowly, her lower lip caught in her teeth. 

Mis said, in a hoarse whisper, "I am convinced the Second Foundation can win, if it is not 
caught prematurely by the Mule. It has kept itself secret; the secrecy must be upheld; it has a 
purpose. You must go there; your information is vital ... may make all the difference. Do you 
hear me?" 

Toran cried in near-agony, "Yes, yes! Tell us how to get there, Ebling? Where is it?" 

"I can tell you," said the faint voice. 

He never did. 

Bayta, face frozen white, lifted her blaster and shot, with an echoing clap of noise. From the 
waist upward, Mis was not, and a ragged hole was in the wall behind. From numb fingers, 
Bayta's blaster dropped to the floor. 



26. END OF THE SEARCH 

There was not a word to be said. The echoes of the blast rolled away into the outer rooms and 
rumbled downward into a hoarse, dying whisper. Before its death, it had muffled the sharp 
clamor of Bayta's falling blaster, smothered Magnifico's high-pitched cry, drowned out Toran's 
inarticulate roar. 

There was a silence of agony. 

Bayta's head was bent into obscurity. A droplet caught the light as it fell. Bayta had never wept 
since her childhood. 

Toran's muscles almost cracked in their spasm, but he did not relax - he felt as if he would 
never unclench his teeth again. Magnifico's face was a faded, lifeless mask. 

Finally, from between teeth still tight, Toran choked out in an unrecognizable voice, "You're a 
Mule's woman, then. He got to you!" 

Bayta looked up, and her mouth twisted with a painful merriment, "/, a Mule's woman? That's 
ironic." 

She smiled - a brittle effort - and tossed her hair back. Slowly, her voice verged back to the 
normal, or something near it. "It's over, Toran; I can talk now. How much I will survive, I don't 
know. But I can start talking-" 

Toran's tension had broken of its own weight and faded into a flaccid dullness, "Talk about 
what, Bay? What's there to talk about?" 

"About the calamity that's followed us. We've remarked about it before, Torie. Don't you 
remember? How defeat has always bitten at our heels and never actually managed to nip us? 
We were on the Foundation, and it collapsed while the Independent Traders still fought - but 
we got out in time to go to Haven. We were on Haven, and it collapsed while the others still 
fought - and again we got out in time. We went to Neotrantor, and by now it's undoubtedly 
joined the Mule." 

Toran listened and shook his head, "I don't understand." 

"Torie, such things don't happen in real life. You and I are insignificant people; we don't fall from 
one vortex of politics into another continuously for the space of a year - unless we carry the 
vortex with us. Unless we carry the source of infection with us! Now do you see?" 

Toran's lips tightened. His glance fixed horribly upon the bloody remnants of what had once 
been a human, and his eyes sickened. 

"Let's get out of here, Bay. Let's get out into the open." 

It was cloudy outside. The wind scudded about them in drab spurts and disordered Bayta's hair. 
Magnifico had crept after them and now he hovered at the edge of their conversation. 

Toran said tightly, "You killed Ebling Mis because you believed him to be the focus of 



infection?" Something in her eyes struck him. He whispered, "He was the Mule?" He did not - 
could not - believe the implications of his own words. 

Bayta laughed sharply, "Poor Ebling the Mule? Galaxy, no! I couldn't have killed him if he were 
the Mule. He would have detected the emotion accompanying the move and changed it for me 
to love, devotion, adoration, terror, whatever he pleased. No, I killed Ebling because he was not 
the Mule. I killed him because he knew where the Second Foundation was, and in two seconds 
would have told the Mule the secret." 

"Would have told the Mule the secret," Toran repeated stupidly. "Told the Mule-" 

And then he emitted a sharp cry, and turned to stare in horror at the clown, who might have 
been crouching unconscious there for the apparent understanding he had of what he heard. 

"Not Magnifico?" Toran whispered the question. 

"Listen!" said Bayta. "Do you remember what happened on Neotrantor? Oh, think for yourself, 
Torie-" 

But he shook his head and mumbled at her. 

She went on, wearily, "A man died on Neotrantor. A man died with no one touching him. Isn't 
that true? Magnifico played on his Visi-Sonor and when he was finished, the crown prince was 
dead. Now isn't that strange? Isn't it queer that a creature afraid of everything, apparently 
helpless with terror, has the capacity to kill at will." 

"The music and the light-effects," said Toran, "have a profound emotional effect-" 

"Yes, an emotional effect. A pretty big one. Emotional effects happen to be the Mule's specialty. 
That, I suppose, can be considered a coincidence. And a creature who can kill by suggestion is 
so full of fright. Well, the Mule tampered with his mind, supposedly, so that can be explained. 
But, Toran, I caught a little of that Visi-Sonor selection that killed the crown prince. Just a little - 
but it was enough to give me that same feeling of despair I had in the Time Vault and on 
Haven. Toran, I can't mistake that particular feeling." 

Toran's face was darkening. "I ... felt it, too. I forgot. I never thought-" 

"It was then that it first occurred to me. It was just a vague feeling - intuition, if you like. I had 
nothing to go on. And then Pritcher told us of the Mule and his mutation, and it was clear in a 
moment. It was the Mule who had created the despair in the Time Vault; it was Magnifico who 
had created the despair on Neotrantor. It was the same emotion. Therefore, the Mule and 
Magnifico were the same person. Doesn't it work out nicely, Torie? Isn't it just like an axiom in 
geometry - things equal to the same thing are equal to each other?" 

She was at the edge of hysteria, but dragged herself back to sobriety by main force. She 
continued, "The discovery scared me to death. If Magnifico were the Mule, he could know my 
emotions - and cure them for his own purposes. I dared not let him know. I avoided him. 

Luckily, he avoided me also; he was too interested in Ebling Mis. I planned killing Mis before he 
could talk. I planned it secretly - as secretly as I could - so secretly I didn't dare tell it to myself. 



"If I could have killed the Mule himself - But I couldn't take the chance. He would have noticed, 
and I would have lost everything." 

She seemed drained of emotion. 

Toran said harshly and with finality, "It's impossible. Look at the miserable creature. He the 
Mule? He doesn't even hear what we're saying." 

But when his eyes followed his pointing finger, Magnifico was erect and alert, his eyes sharp 
and darkly bright. His voice was without a trace of an accent, "I hear her, my friend. It is merely 
that I have been sitting here and brooding on the fact that with all my cleverness and 
forethought I could make a mistake, and lose so much." 

Toran stumbled backward as if afraid the clown might touch him or that his breath might 
contaminate him. 

Magnifico nodded, and answered the unspoken question. "I am the Mule." 

He seemed no longer a grotesque; his pipestem limbs, his beak of a nose lost their 
humor-compelling qualities. His fear was gone; his bearing was firm. 

He was in command of the situation with an ease born of usage. 

He said, tolerantly, "Seat yourselves. Go ahead; you might as well sprawl out and make 
yourselves comfortable. The game's over, and I'd like to tell you a story. It's a weakness of 
mine - I want people to understand me." 

And his eyes as he looked at Bayta were still the old, soft sad brown ones of Magnifico, the 
clown. 

"There is nothing really to my childhood," he began, plunging bodily into quick, impatient 
speech, "that I care to remember. Perhaps you can understand that. My meagerness is 
glandular; my nose I was born with. It was not possible for me to lead a normal childhood. My 
mother died before she saw me. I do not know my father. I grew up haphazard, wounded and 
tortured in mind, full of self-pity and hatred of others. I was known then as a queer child. All 
avoided me; most out of dislike; some out of fear. Queer incidents occurred - Well, never mind! 
Enough happened to enable Captain Pritcher, in his investigation of my childhood to realize 
that I was a mutant, which was more than / ever realized until I was in my twenties." 

Toran and Bayta listened distantly. The wash of his voice broke over them, seated on the 
ground as they were, unheeded almost. The clown - or the Mule - paced before them with little 
steps, speaking downward to his own folded arms. 

"The whole notion of my unusual power seems to have broken on me so slowly, in such 
sluggish steps. Even toward the end, I couldn't believe it. To me, men's minds are dials, with 
pointers that indicate the prevailing emotion. It is a poor picture, but how else can I explain it? 
Slowly, I learned that I could reach into those minds and turn the pointer to the spot I wished, 
that I could nail it there forever. And then it took even longer to realize that others couldn't. 

"But the consciousness of power came, and with it, the desire to make up for the miserable 



position of my earlier life. Maybe you can understand it. Maybe you can try to understand it. It 
isn't easy to be a freak - to have a mind and an understanding and be a freak. Laughter and 
cruelty! To be different! To be an outsider! 

"You've never been through it!" 

Magnifico looked up to the sky and teetered on the balls of his feet and reminisced stonily, "But 
I eventually did learn, and I decided that the Galaxy and I could take turns. Come, they had had 
their innings, and I had been patient about it - for twenty-two years. My turn! It would be up to 
the rest of you to take it! And the odds would be fair enough for the Galaxy. One of me! 
Quadrillions of them!" 

He paused to glance at Bayta swiftly. "But I had a weakness. I was nothing in myself. If I could 
gain power, it could only be by means of others. Success came to me through middlemen. 
Always! It was as Pritcher said. Through a pirate, I obtained my first asteroidal base of 
operations. Through an industrialist I got my first foothold on a planet. Through a variety of 
others ending with the warlord of Kalgan, I won Kalgan itself and got a navy. After that, it was 
the Foundation - and you two come into the story. 

"The Foundation," he said, softly, "was the most difficult task I had met. To beat it, I would have 
to win over, break down, or render useless an extraordinary proportion of its ruling class. I 
could have done it from scratch - but a short cut was possible, and I looked for it. After all, if a 
strong man can lift five hundred pounds, it does not mean that he is eager to do so 
continuously. My emotional control is not an easy task, I prefer not to use it, where not fully 
necessary. So I accepted allies in my first attack upon the Foundation. 

"As my clown, I looked for the agent, or agents, of the Foundation that must inevitably have 
been sent to Kalgan to investigate my humble self. I know now it was Han Pritcher I was 
looking for. By a stroke of fortune, I found you instead. I am a telepath, but not a complete one, 
and, my lady, you were from the Foundation. I was led astray by that. It was not fatal for 
Pritcher joined us afterward, but it was the starting point of an error that was fatal." 

Toran stirred for the first time. He spoke in an outraged tone, "Hold on, now. You mean that 
when I outfaced that lieutenant on Kalgan with only a stun pistol, and rescued you - that you 
had emotionally-controlled me into it." He was spluttering. "You mean I've been tampered with 
all along." 

A thin smile played on Magnifico's face. "Why not? You don't think it's likely? Ask yourself then 
- Would you have risked death for a strange grotesque you had never seen before, if you had 
been in your right mind? I imagine you were surprised at events in cold after-blood." 

"Yes," said Bayta, distantly, "he was. It's quite plain." 

"As it was," continued the Mule, "Toran was in no danger. The lieutenant had his own strict 
instructions to let us go. So the three of us and Pritcher went to the Foundation - and see how 
my campaign shaped itself instantly. When Pritcher was court-martialed and we were present, I 
was busy. The military judges of that trial later commanded their squadrons in the war. They 
surrendered rather easily, and my Navy won the battle of Horleggor, and other lesser affairs. 



"Through Pritcher, I met Dr. Mis, who brought me a Visi-Sonor, entirely of his own accord, and 
simplified my task immensely. Only it wasn't entirely of his own accord." 

Bayta interrupted, "Those concerts! I've been trying to fit them in. Now I see." 

"Yes," said Magnifico, "the Visi-Sonor acts as a focusing device. In a way, it is a primitive 
device for emotional control in itself. With it, I can handle people in quantity and single people 
more intensively. The concerts I gave on Terminus before it fell and Haven before it fell 
contributed to the general defeatism. I might have made the crown prince of Neotrantor very 
sick without the Visi-Sonor, but I could not have killed him. You see? 

"But it was Ebling Mis who was my most important find. He might have been-" Magnifico said it 
with chagrin, then hurried on, "There is a special facet to emotional control you do not know 
about. Intuition or insight or hunch-tendency, whatever you wish to call it, can be treated as an 
emotion. At least, I can treat it so. You don't understand it, do you?" 

He waited for no negative, "The human mind works at low efficiency. Twenty percent is the 
figure usually given. When, momentarily, there is a flash of greater power it is termed a hunch, 
or insight, or intuition. I found early that I could induce a continual use of high brain-efficiency. It 
is a killing process for the person affected, but it is useful. The nuclear field-depressor which I 
used in the war against the Foundation was the result of high-pressuring a Kalgan technician. 
Again I work through others. 

"Ebling Mis was the bull's-eye. His potentialities were high, and I needed him. Even before my 
war with the Foundation had opened, I had already sent delegates to negotiate with the Empire. 
It was at that time I began my search for the Second Foundation. Naturally, I didn't find it. 
Naturally, I knew that I must find it - and Ebling Mis was the answer. With his mind at high 
efficiency, he might possibly have duplicated the work of Hari Seldon. 

"Partly, he did. I drove him to the utter limit. The process was ruthless, but had to be completed. 
He was dying at the end, but he lived-" Again, his chagrin interrupted him. "He would have 
lived long enough. Together, we three could have gone onward to the Second Foundation. It 
would have been the last battle - but for my mistake." 

Toran stirred his voice to hardness, "Why do you stretch it out so? What was your mistake, and 
... and have done with your speech." 

"Why, your wife was the mistake. Your wife was an unusual person. I had never met her like 
before in my life. I ... I-" Quite suddenly, Magnifico's voice broke. He recovered with difficulty. 
There was a grimness about him as he continued. "She liked me without my having to juggle 
her emotions. She was neither repelled by me nor amused by me. She liked me! 

"Don't you understand? Can't you see what that would mean to me? Never before had anyone 
- Well, I ... cherished that. My own emotions played me false, though I was master of all others. 
I stayed out of her mind, you see; I did not tamper with it. I cherished the natural feeling too 
greatly. It was my mistake - the first. 

"You, Toran, were under control. You never suspected me; never questioned me; never saw 
anything peculiar or strange about me. As for instance, when the 'Filian' ship stopped us. They 



knew our location, by the way, because I was in communication with them, as I've remained in 
communication with my generals at all times. When they stopped us, I was taken aboard to 
adjust Han Pritcher, who was on it as a prisoner. When I left, he was a colonel, a Mule's man, 
and in command. The whole procedure was too open even for you, Toran. Yet you accepted 
my explanation of the matter, which was full of fallacies. See what I mean?" 

Toran grimaced, and challenged him, "How did you retain communications with your generals?" 

"There was no difficulty to it. Hyperwave transmitters are easy to handle and eminently 
portable. Nor could I be detected in a real sense! Anyone who did catch me in the act would 
leave me with a slice gapped out of his memory. It happened, on occasion. 

"On Neotrantor, my own foolish emotions betrayed me again. Bayta was not under my control, 
but even so might never have suspected me if I had kept my head about the crown prince. His 
intentions towards Bayta - annoyed me. 

"I killed him. It was a foolish gesture. An unobtrusive flight would have served as well. 

"And still your suspicions would not have been certainties, if I had stopped Pritcher in his 
well-intentioned babbling, or paid less attention to Mis and more to you-" He shrugged. 

"That's the end of it?" asked Bayta. 

"That's the end." 

"What now, then?" 

"I'll continue with my program. That I'll find another as adequately brained and trained as Ebling 
Mis in these degenerate days, I doubt. I shall have to search for the Second Foundation 
otherwise. In a sense you have defeated me." 

And now Bayta was upon her feet, triumphant. "In a sense? Only in a sense? We have 
defeated you entirely! All your victories outside the Foundation count for nothing, since the 
Galaxy is a barbarian vacuum now. The Foundation itself is only a minor victory, since it wasn't 
meant to stop your variety of crisis. It's the Second Foundation you must beat - the Second 
Foundation - and it's the Second Foundation that will defeat you. Your only chance was to 
locate it and strike it before it was prepared. You won't do that now. Every minute from now on, 
they will be readier for you. At this moment, at this moment, the machinery may have started. 
You'll know - when it strikes you, and your short term of power will be over, and you'll be just 
another strutting conqueror, flashing quickly and meanly across the bloody face of history." 

She was breathing hard, nearly gasping in her vehemence, "And we've defeated you, Toran 
and I. I am satisfied to die." 

But the Mule's sad, brown eyes were the sad, brown, loving eyes of Magnifico. "I won't kill you 
or your husband. It is, after all, impossible for you two to hurt me further; and killing you won't 
bring back Ebling Mis. My mistakes were my own, and I take responsibility for them. Your 
husband and yourself may leave! Go in peace, for the sake of what I call - friendship." 

Then, with a sudden touch of pride, "And meanwhile I am still the Mule, the most powerful man 



in the Galaxy. I shall still defeat the Second Foundation." 

And Bayta shot her last arrow with a firm, calm certitude, "You won't! I have faith in the wisdom 
of Seldon yet. You shall be the last ruler of your dynasty, as well as the first." 

Something caught Magnifico. "Of my dynasty? Yes, I had thought of that, often. That I might 
establish a dynasty. That I might have a suitable consort." 

Bayta suddenly caught the meaning of the look in his eyes and froze horribly. 

Magnifico shook his head. "I sense your revulsion, but that's silly. If things were otherwise, I 
could make you happy very easily. It would be an artificial ecstasy, but there would be no 
difference between it and the genuine emotion. But things are not otherwise. I call myself the 
Mule - but not because of my strength - obviously-" 

He left them, never looking back. 




ASIMOV 


SECOND FOUNDATION 




SECOND FOUNDATION 
ISAAC ASIMOV 


Contents 

PROLOGUE 

PART I SEARCH BY THE MULE 

1 . TWO MEN AND THE MULE 

First Interlude 

2. TWO MEN WITHOUT THE MULE 

Second Interlude 

3. TWO MEN AND A PEASANT 

Third Interlude 

4. TWO MEN AND THE ELDERS 

Fourth Interlude 

5. ONE MAN AND THE MULE 

6. ONE MAN, THE MULE - AND ANOTHER 

Last Interlude 

PART II SEARCH BY THE FOUNDATION 

7. ARCADIA 

8. SELDON'S PLAN 

9. THE CONSPIRATORS 

10. APPROACHING CRISIS 

1 1 . STOWAWAY 

12. LORD 


13. LADY 


14. ANXIETY 

15. THROUGH THE GRID 

16. BEGINNING OF WAR 

1 7. WAR 

18. GHOST OF A WORLD 

19. END OF WAR 

20. "I KNOW..." 

21 . THE ANSWER THAT SATISFIED 

22. THE ANSWER THAT WAS TRUE 


Prologue 

The First Galactic Empire had endured for tens of thousands of years. It had included all the 
planets of the Galaxy in a centralized rule, sometimes tyrannical, sometimes benevolent, 
always orderly. Human beings had forgotten that any other form of existence could be. 

All except Hari Seldon. 

Hari Seldon was the last great scientist of the First Empire. It was he who brought the science 
of psycho-history to its full development. Psycho-history was the quintessence of sociology, it 
was the science of human behavior reduced to mathematical equations. 

The individual human being is unpredictable, but the reactions of human mobs, Seldon found, 
could be treated statistically. The larger the mob, the greater the accuracy that could be 
achieved. And the size of the human masses that Seldon worked with was no less than the 
population of the Galaxy which in his time was numbered in the quintillions. 

It was Seldon, then, who foresaw, against all common sense and popular belief, that the 
brilliant Empire which seemed so strong was in a state of irremediable decay and decline. He 
foresaw (or he solved his equations and interpreted its symbols, which amounts to the same 
thing) that left to itself, the Galaxy would pass through a thirty thousand year period of misery 
and anarchy before a unified government would rise once more. 

He set about to remedy the situation, to bring about a state of affairs that would restore peace 
and civilization in a single thousand of years. Carefully, he set up two colonies of scientists that 
he called "Foundations." With deliberate intention, he set them up "at opposite ends of the 
Galaxy." One Foundation was set up in the full daylight of publicity. The existence of the other, 


the Second Foundation, was drowned in silence. 

In Foundation (Gnome, 1951) and Foundation and Empire (Gnome, 1952) are told the first 
three centuries of the history of the First Foundation. It began as a small community of 
Encyclopedists lost in the emptiness of the outer periphery of the Galaxy. Periodically, it faced 
a crisis in which the variables of human intercourse, of the social and economic currents of the 
time constricted about it. Its freedom to move lay along only one certain line and when it moved 
in that direction, a new horizon of development opened before it. All had been planned by Hari 
Seldon, long dead now. 

The First Foundation, with its superior science, took over the barbarized planets that 
surrounded it. It faced the anarchic Warlords that broke away from the dying Empire and beat 
them. It faced the remnant of the Empire itself under its last strong Emperor and its last strong 
General and beat it. 

Then it faced something which Hari Seldon could not foresee, the overwhelming power of a 
single human being, a Mutant. The creature known as the Mule was born with the ability to 
mold men's emotions and to shape their minds. His bitterest opponents were made into his 
devoted servants. Armies could not, would not fight him. Before him, the First Foundation fell 
and Seldon's schemes lay partly in ruins. 

There was left the mysterious Second Foundation, the goal of all searches. The Mule must find 
it to make his conquest of the Galaxy complete. The faithful of what was left of the First 
Foundation must find it for quite another reason. But where was it? That no one knew. 

This, then, is the story of the search for the Second Foundation! 


PART I 

SEARCH BY THE MULE 


1 

Two Men and the Mule 

THE MULE It was after the fall of the First Foundation that the constructive aspects of the 
Mule's regime took shape. After the definite break-up at the first Galactic Empire, it was he who 
first presented history with a unified volume at space truly imperial in scope. The earlier 
commercial empire at the fallen Foundation had been diverse and loosely knit, despite the 
impalpable backing at the predictions of psycho-history. It was not to be compared with the 
tightly controlled 'Union of Worlds' under the Mule, comprising as it did, one-tenth the volume of 





the Galaxy and one-fifteenth of its population. Particularly during the era of the so-called 
Search.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA * 

* All quotations from the Encyclopedia Galactica here reproduced are taken from the 1 1 6th 
Edition published in 1020 F.E. by the Encyclopedia Galactica Publishing Co., Terminus, with 
permission of the publishers. 

There is much more that the Encyclopedia has to say on the subject of the Mule and his Empire 
but almost all of it is not germane to the issue at immediate hand, and most of it is considerably 
too dry for our purposes in any case. Mainly, the article concerns itself at this point with the 
economic conditions that led to the rise of the "First Citizen of the Union" - the Mule's official 
title - and with the economic consequences thereof. 

If, at any time, the writer of the article is mildly astonished at the colossal haste with which the 
Mule rose from nothing to vast dominion in five years, he conceals it. If he is further surprised at 
the sudden cessation of expansion in favor of a five-year consolidation of territory, he hides the 
fact. 

We therefore abandon the Encyclopedia and continue on our own path for our own purposes 
and take up the history of the Great Interregnum - between the First and Second Galactic 
Empires - at the end of that five years of consolidation. 

Politically, the Union is quiet. Economically, it is prosperous. Few would care to exchange the 
peace of the Mule's steady grip for the chaos that had preceded, On the worlds that five years 
previously had known the Foundation, there might be a nostalgic regret, but no more. The 
Foundation's leaders were dead, where useless; and Converted, where useful. 

And of the Converted, the most useful was Flan Pritcher, now lieutenant general. 

In the days of the Foundation, Flan Pritcher had been a captain and a member of the 
underground Democratic Opposition. When the Foundation fell to the Mule without a fight, 
Pritcher fought the Mule. Until, that is, he was Converted. 

The Conversion was not the ordinary one brought on by the power of superior reason. Flan 
Pritcher know that well enough. Fie had been changed because the Mule was a mutant with 
mental powers quite capable of adjusting the conditions of ordinary humans to suit himself. But 
that satisfied him completely. That was as it should be. The very contentment with the 
Conversion was a prime symptom of it, but Flan Pritcher was no longer even curious about the 
matter. 

And now that he was returning from his fifth major expedition into the boundlessness of the 
Galaxy outside the Union, it was with something approaching artless joy that the veteran 
spaceman and Intelligence agent considered his approaching audience with the "First Citizen." 
FHis hard face, gouged out of a dark, grainless wood that did not seem to be capable of smiling 
without cracking, didn't show it - but the outward indications were unnecessary. The Mule could 
see the emotions within, down to the smallest, much as an ordinary man could see the twitch of 
an eyebrow. 



Pritcher left his air car at the old vice-regal hangars and entered the palace grounds on foot as 
was required. He walked one mile along the arrowed highway - which was empty and silent. 
Pritcher knew that over the square miles of Palace grounds, there was not one guard, not one 
soldier, not one armed man. 

The Mule had need of no protection. 

The Mule was his own best, all-powerful protector. 

Pritcher's footsteps beat softly in his own cars, as the palace reared its gleaming, incredibly 
light and incredibly strong metallic walls before him in the daring, overblown, near-hectic arches 
that characterized the architecture of the Late Empire. It brooded strongly over the empty 
grounds, over the crowded city on the horizon. 

Within the palace was that one man - by himself - on whose inhuman mental attributes 
depended the new aristocracy, and the whole structure of the Union. 

The huge, smooth door swung massively open at the general's approach, and he entered. He 
stepped on to the wide, sweeping ramp that moved upward under him. He rose swiftly in the 
noiseless elevator. He stood before the small plain door of the Mule's own room in the highest 
glitter of the palace spires. 

It opened- 

Bail Channis was young, and Bail Channis was Unconverted. That is, in plainer language, his 
emotional make-up had been unadjusted by the Mule. It remained exactly as it had been 
formed by the original shape of its heredity and the subsequent modifications of his 
environment. And that satisfied him, too. 

At not quite thirty, he was in marvelously good odor in the capital. He was handsome and 
quick-witted - therefore successful in society. He was intelligent and self-possessed - therefore 
successful with the Mule. And he was thoroughly pleased at both successes. 

And now, for the first time, the Mule had summoned him to personal audience. 

His legs carried him down the long, glittering highway that led tautly to the sponge-aluminum 
spires that had been once the residence of the viceroy of Kalgan, who ruled under the old 
emperors; and that had been later the residence of the independent Princes of Kalgan, who 
ruled in their own name; and that was now the residence of the First Citizen of the Union, who 
ruled over an empire of his own. 

Channis hummed softly to himself. He did not doubt what this was all about. The Second 
Foundation, naturally! That all-embracing bogey, the mere consideration of which had thrown 
the Mule back from his policy of limitless expansion into static caution. The official term was - 
"consolidation." 

Now there were rumors - you couldn't stop rumors. The Mule was to begin the offensive once 
more. The Mule had discovered the whereabouts of the Second Foundation, and would attack 
The Mule had come to an agreement with the Second Foundation and divided the Galaxy. The 
Mule had decided the Second Foundation did not exist and would take over all the Galaxy. 



No use listing all the varieties one heard in the anterooms. It was not even the first time such 
rumors had circulated. But now they seemed to have more body in them, and all the free, 
expansive Souls Who thrived on war, military adventure, and political chaos and withered in 
times of stability and stagnant peace were joyful. 

Bail Channis was one of these. He did not fear the mysterious Second Foundation. For that 
matter, he did not fear the Mule, and boasted of it. Some, perhaps, who disapproved of one at 
once so young and so well-off, waited darkly for the reckoning with the gay ladies' man who 
employed his wit openly at the expense of the Mule's physical appearance and sequestered 
life. None dared join him and few dared laugh, but when nothing happened to him, his 
reputation rose accordingly. 

Channis was improvising words to the tune he was humming. Nonsense words with the 
recurrent refrain: "Second Foundation threatens the Nation and all of Creation." 

He was at the palace. 

The huge, smooth door swung massively open at his approach and he entered. He stepped on 
to the wide, sweeping ramp that moved upward under him. He rose swiftly in the noiseless 
elevator. He stood before the small plain door of the Mule's own room in the highest glitter of 
the palace spires. 

It opened- 

The man who had no name other than the Mule, and no title other than First Citizen looked out 
through the one-way transparency of the wall to the light and lofty city on the horizon. 

In the darkening twilight, the stars were emerging, and not one but owed allegiance to him. 

He smiled with fleeting bitterness at the thought. The allegiance they owed was to a personality 
few had ever seen. 

He was not a man to look at, the Mule - not a man to look at without derision. Not more than 
one hundred and twenty pounds was stretched out into his five-foot-eight length. His limbs were 
bony stalks that jutted out of his scrawniness in graceless angularity. And his thin face was 
nearly drowned out in the prominence of a fleshy beak that thrust three inches outward. 

Only his eyes played false with the general farce that was the Mule. In their softness - a 
strange softness for the Galaxy's greatest conqueror - sadness was never entirely subdued. 

In the city was to be found all the gaiety of a luxurious capital on a luxurious world. He might 
have established his capital on the Foundation, the strongest of his now-conquered enemies, 
but it was far out on the very rim of the Galaxy. Kalgan, more centrally located, with a long 
tradition as aristocracy's playground, suited him better - strategically. 

But in its traditional gaiety, enhanced by unheard-of prosperity, he found no peace. 

They feared him and obeyed him and, perhaps, even respected him - from a goodly distance. 
But who could look at him without contempt? Only those he had Converted. And of what value 
was their artificial loyalty? It lacked flavor. He might have adopted titles, and enforced ritual and 



invented elaborations, but even that would have changed nothing. Better - or at least, no worse 

- to be simply the First Citizen - and to hide himself. 

There was a sudden surge of rebellion within him - strong and brutal. Not a portion of the 
Galaxy must be denied him, For five years he had remained silent and buried here on Kalgan 
because of the eternal, misty, space-ridden menace of the unseen, unheard, unknown Second 
Foundation. Fie was thirty-two. Not old - but he felt old. His body, whatever its mutant mental 
powers, was physically weak. 

Every star! Every star he could see - and every star he couldnt see. It must all be his! 

Revenge on all. On a humanity of which he wasn't a part. On a Galaxy in which he didn't fit. 

The cool, overhead warning light flickered. Fie could follow the progress of the man who had 
entered the palace, and simultaneously, as though his mutant sense had been enhanced and 
sensitized in the lonely twilight, he felt the wash of emotional content touch the fibers of his 
brain. 

Fie recognized the identity without an effort. It was Pritcher. 

Captain Pritcher of the one-time Foundation. The Captain Pritcher who had been ignored and 
passed over by the bureaucrats of that decaying government. The Captain Pritcher whose job 
as petty spy he had wiped out and whom he had lifted from its slime. The Captain Pritcher 
whom he had made first colonel and then general; whose scope of activity he had made 
Galaxywide. 

The now-General Pritcher who was, iron rebel though he began, completely loyal. And yet with 
all that, not loyal because of benefits gained, not loyal out of gratitude, not loyal as a fair return 

- but loyal only through the artifice of Conversion. 

The Mule was conscious of that strong unalterable surface layer of loyalty and love that colored 
every swirl and eddy of the emotionality of Flan Pritcher - the layer he had himself implanted 
five years before. Far underneath there were the original traces of stubborn individuality, 
impatience of rule, idealism - but even he, himself, could scarcely detect them any longer. 

The door behind him opened, and he turned. The transparency of the wall faded to opacity, and 
the purple evening light gave way to the whitely blazing glow of atomic power. 

Flan Pritcher took the seat indicated. There was neither bowing, nor kneeling nor the use of 
honorifics in private audiences with the Mule. The Mule was merely "First Citizen." Fie was 
addressed as "sir." You sat in his presence, and you could turn your back on him if it so 
happened that you did. 

To Flan Pritcher this was all evidence of the sure and confident power of the man. Fie was 
warmly satisfied with it. 

The Mule said: "Your final report reached me yesterday. I can't deny that I find it somewhat 
depressing, Pritcher." 

The general's eyebrows closed upon each other: "Yes, I imagine so - but I don't see to what 



other conclusions I could have come. There just isn't any Second Foundation, sir." 

Arid the Mule considered and then slowly shook his head, as he had done many a time before: 
"There's the evidence of Ebling Mis. There is always the evidence of Ebling Mis." 

It was not a new story. Pritcher said without qualification: "Mis may have been the greatest 
psychologist of the Foundation, but he was a baby compared to Hari Seldon. At the time he 
was investigating Seldon's works, he was under the artificial stimulation of your own brain 
control. You may have pushed him too far. Fie might have been wrong. Sir, he must have been 
wrong." 

The Mule sighed, his lugubrious face thrust forward on its thin stalk of a neck. "If only he had 
lived another minute. Fie was on the point of telling me where the Second Foundation was. Fie 
knew, I'm telling you. I need not have retreated. I need not have waited and waited. So much 
time lost. Five years gone for nothing." 

Pritcher could not have been censorious over the weak longing of his ruler; his controlled 
mental make-up forbade that. Fie was disturbed instead; vaguely uneasy. Fie said: "But what 
alternative explanation can there possibly be, sir? Five times I've gone out. You yourself have 
plotted the routes. And I've left no asteroid unturned. It was three hundred years ago that FHari 
Seldon of the old Empire supposedly established two Foundations to act as nuclei of a new 
Empire to replace the dying old one. One hundred years after Seldon, the First Foundation - 
the one we know so well - was known through all the Periphery. One hundred fifty years after 
Seldon - at the time of the last battle with the old Empire - it was known throughout the Galaxy. 
And now it's three hundred years - and where should this mysterious Second be? In no eddy of 
the Galactic stream has it been heard of." 

"Ebling Mis said it kept itself secret. Only secrecy can turn its weakness to strength." 

"Secrecy as deep as this is past possibility without nonexistence as well." 

The Mule looked up, large eyes sharp and wary. "No. It does exist." A bony finger pointed 
sharply. "There is going to be a slight change in tactics." 

Pritcher frowned. "You plan to leave yourself? I would scarcely advise it." 

"No, of course not. You will have to go out once again - one last time. But with another in joint 
command." 

There was a silence, and Pritcher's voice was hard, "Who, Sir?" 

"There's a young man here in Kalgan. Bail Channis." 

"I've never heard of him, Sir." 

"No, I imagine not. But he's got an agile mind, he's ambitious - and he's not Converted." 

Pritcher's long jaw trembled for a bare instant, "I fail to see the advantage in that." 

"There is one, Pritcher. You're a resourceful and experienced man. You have given me good 
service. But you are Converted. Your motivation is simply an enforced and helpless loyalty to 



myself. When you lost your native motivations, you lost something, some subtle drive, that I 
cannot possibly replace." 

"I don't feel that, Sir," said Pritcher grimly. "I recall myself quite well as I was in the days when I 
was an enemy of yours. I feel none the inferior." 

"Naturally not," and the Mule’s mouth twitched into a smile. "Your judgment in this matter is 
scarcely objective. This Channis, now, is ambitious - for himself. He is completely trustworthy - 
out of no loyalty but to himself. He knows that it is on my coattails that he rides and he would do 
anything to increase my power that the ride might be long and far and that the destination might 
be glorious. If he goes with you, there is just that added push behind his seeking - that push for 
himself.' 

"Then," said Pritcher. still insistent, "why not remove my own Conversion, if you think that will 
improve me. I can scarcely be mistrusted, now." 

"That never, Pritcher. While you are within arm's reach, or blaster reach, of myself, you will 
remain firmly held in Conversion. If I were to release you this minute, I would be dead the next." 

The general's nostrils flared. "I am hurt that you should think so." 

"I don't mean to hurt you, but it is impossible for you to realize what your feelings would be if 
free to form themselves along the lines of your natural motivation. The human mind resents 
control. The ordinary human hypnotist cannot hypnotize a person against his will for that 
reason. I can, because I'm not a hypnotist, and, believe me, Pritcher, the resentment that you 
cannot show and do not even know you possess is something I wouldn't want to face." 

Pritcher's head bowed. Futility wrenched him and left him gray and haggard inside. He said with 
an effort, "But how can you trust this man. I mean, completely - as you can trust me in my 
Conversion." 

"Well, I suppose I can't entirely. That is why you must go with him. You see, Pritcher," and the 
Mule buried himself in the large armchair against the soft back of which he looked like an 
angularly animated toothpick, "if he should stumble on the Second Foundation - if it should 
occur to him that an arrangement with them might be more profitable than with me - You 
understand?" 

A profoundly satisfied light blazed in Pritcher's eyes. "That is better, Sir." 

"Exactly. But remember, he must have a free rein as far as possible." 

"Certainly." 

"And ... uh ... Pritcher. The young man is handsome, pleasant and extremely charming. Don't 
let him fool you. He's a dangerous and unscrupulous character. Don't get in his way unless 
you're prepared to meet him properly. That's all." 

The Mule was alone again. He let the lights die and the wall before him kicked to transparency 
again. The sky was purple now, and the city was a smudge of light on the horizon. 

What was it all for? And if he were the master of all there was - what then? Would it really stop 



men like Pritcher. from being straight and tall, self-confident, strong? Would Bail Channis lose 
his looks? Would he himself be other than he was? 

He cursed his doubts. What was he really after? 

The cool, overhead warning light flickered. He could follow the progress of the man who had 
entered the palace and, almost against his will, he felt the soft wash of emotional content touch 
the fibers of his brain. 

He recognized the identity without an effort. It was Channis. Here the Mule saw no uniformity, 
but the primitive diversity of a strong mind, untouched and unmolded except by the manifold 
disorganizations of the Universe. It writhed in floods and waves. There was caution on the 
surface, a thin, smoothing effect, but with touches of cynical ribaldry in the hidden eddies of it. 
And underneath there was the strong flow of self-interest and self-love, with a gush of cruel 
humor here and there, and a deep, still pool of ambition underlying all. 

The Mule felt that he could reach out and dam the current, wrench the pool from its basin and 
turn it in another course, dry up one flow and begin another. But what of it? If he could bend 
Channis’ curly head in the profoundest adoration, would that change his own grotesquerie that 
made him shun the day and love the night, that made him a recluse inside an empire that was 
unconditionally big? 

The door behind him opened, and he turned. The transparency of the wall faded to opacity, and 
the darkness gave way to the whitely blazing artifice of atomic power. 

Bail Channis sat down lightly and said: "This is a not-quite-unexpected honor, sir." 

The Mule rubbed his proboscis with all four fingers at once and sounded a bit irritable in his 
response. "Why so, young man?" 

"A hunch, I suppose. Unless I want to admit that I've been listening to rumors." 

"Rumors? Which one of the several dozen varieties are you referring to?" 

"Those that say a renewal of the Galactic Offensive is being planned. It is a hope with me that 
such is true and that I might play an appropriate part." 

"Then you think there is a Second Foundation?" 

"Why not? It would make things so much more interesting." 

"And you find interest in it as well?" 

"Certainly. In the very mystery of it! What better subject could you find for conjecture? The 
newspaper supplements are full of nothing else lately - which is probably significant. The 
Cosmos had one of its feature writers compose a weirdie about a world consisting of beings of 
pure mind - the Second Foundation, you see - who had developed mental force to energies 
large enough to compete with any known to physical science. Spaceships could be blasted 
light-years away, planets could be turned out of their orbits-" 

"Interesting. Yes. But do you have any notions on the subject? Do you subscribe to this 



mind-power notion?' 

"Galaxy, no! Do you think creatures like that would stay on their own planet? No, sir. I think the 
Second Foundation remains hidden because it is weaker than we think." 

"In that case, I can explain myself very easily. How would you like to head an expedition to 
locate the Second Foundation?" 

For a moment Channis seemed caught up by the sudden rush of events at just a little greater 
speed than he was prepared for. His tongue had apparently skidded to a halt in a lengthening 
silence. 

The Mule said dryly: "Well?" 

Channis corrugated his forehead. "Certainly. But where am I to go? Have you any information 
available?" 

"General Pritcher will be with you-" 

"Then I'm not to head it?" 

"Judge for yourself when I'm done. Listen, you're not of the Foundation. You're a native of 
Kalgan, aren't you? Yes. Well, then, your knowledge of the Seldon plan may be vague. When 
the first Galactic Empire was falling, Hari Seldon and a group of psychohistorians, analyzing the 
future course of history by mathematical tools no longer available in these degenerate times, 
set up two Foundations, one at each end of the Galaxy, in such a way that the economic and 
sociological forces that were slowly evolving, would make them serve as foci for the Second 
Empire. Hari Seldon planned on a thousand years to accomplish that - and it would have taken 
thirty thousand without the Foundations. But he couldn't count on me. I am a mutant and I am 
unpredictable by psychohistory which can only deal with the average reactions of numbers. Do 
you understand?" 

"Perfectly, sir. But how does that involve me?' 

"You'll understand shortly. I intend to unite the Galaxy now - and reach Seldon's thousand-year 
goal in three hundred. One Foundation - the world of physical scientists - is still flourishing, 
under me. Under the prosperity and order of the Union, the atomic weapons they have 
developed are capable of dealing with anything in the Galaxy - except perhaps the Second 
Foundation. So I must know more about it. General Pritcher is of the definite opinion that it 
does not exist at all. I know otherwise." 

Channis said delicately: "How do you know, sir?" 

And the Mule's words were suddenly liquid indignation: "Because minds under my control have 
been interfered with. Delicately! Subtly! But not so subtly that I couldn't notice. And these 
interferences are increasing, and hitting valuable men at important times. Do you wonder now 
that a certain discretion has kept me motionless these years? 

"That is your importance. General Pritcher is the best man left me, so he is no longer safe. Of 
course, he does not know that. But you are Unconverted and therefore not instantly detectable 



as a Mule's man. You may fool the Second Foundation longer than one of my own men would - 
perhaps just sufficiently longer. Do you understand?" 

"Um-m-m. Yes. But pardon me, sir, if I question you. How are these men of yours disturbed, so 
that I might detect change in General Pritcher, in case any occurs. Are they Unconverted 
again? Do they become disloyal?" 

"No. I told you it was subtle. It's more disturbing than that, because its harder to detect and 
sometimes I have to wait before acting, uncertain whether a key man is being normally erratic 
or has been tampered with. Their loyalty is left intact, but initiative and ingenuity are rubbed out. 
I'm left with a perfectly normal person, apparently, but one completely useless. In the last year, 
six have been so treated. Six of my best." A corner of his mouth lifted. "They're in charge of 
training bases now - and my most earnest wishes go with them that no emergencies come up 
for them to decide upon." 

"Suppose, sir ... suppose it were not the Second Foundation. What if it were another, such as 
yourself - another mutant?" 

"The planning is too careful, too long range. A single man would be in a greater hurry. No, it is a 
world, and you are to be my weapon against it." 

Channis' eyes shone as he said: "I'm delighted at the chance." 

But the Mule caught the sudden emotional upwelling. He said: "Yes, apparently it occurs to you, 
that you will perform a unique service, worthy of a unique reward - perhaps even that of being 
my successor. Quite so. But there are unique punishments, too, you know. My emotional 
gymnastics are not confined to the creation of loyalty alone." 

And the little smile on his thin lips was grim, as Channis leaped out of his seat in horror. 

For just an instant, just one, flashing instant, Channis had felt the pang of an overwhelming 
grief close over him. It had slammed down with a physical pain that had blackened his mind 
unbearably, and then lifted. Now nothing was left but the strong wash of anger. 

The Mule said: "Anger won't help ... yes, you're covering it up now, aren't you? But I can see it. 
So just remember - that sort of business can be made more intense and kept up. I've killed 
men by emotional control, and there's no death crueler." 

He paused: "That's all!" 

The Mule was alone again. He let the lights die and the wall before him kicked to transparency 
again. The sky was black, and the rising body of the Galactic Lens was spreading its 
bespanglement across the velvet depths of space. 

All that haze of nebula was a mass of stars so numerous that they melted one into the other 
and left nothing but a cloud of light. 

And all to be his— 

And now but one last arrangement to make, and he could sleep. 



FIRST INTERLUDE 


The Executive Council of the Second Foundation was in session. To us they are merely voices. 
Neither the exact scene of the meeting nor the identity of those present are essential at the 
point. 

Nor, strictly speaking, can we even consider an exact reproduction of any part of the session - 
unless we wish to sacrifice completely even the minimum comprehensibility we have a right to 
expect. 

We deal here with psychologists - and not merely psychologists. Let us say, rather, scientists 
with a psychological orientation. That is, men whose fundamental conception of scientific 
philosophy is pointed in an entirely different direction from all of the orientations we know. The 
"psychology" of scientists brought up among the axioms deduced from the observational habits 
of physical science has only the vaguest relationship to PSYCFIOLOGY. 

Which is about as far as I can go in explaining color to a blind man - with myself as blind as the 
audience. 

The point being made is that the minds assembled understood thoroughly the workings of each 
other, not only by general theory but by the specific application over a long period of these 
theories to particular individuals. Speech as known to us was unnecessary. A fragment of a 
sentence amounted almost to long-winded redundancy. A gesture, a grunt, the curve of a facial 
line - even a significantly timed pause yielded informational juice. 

The liberty is taken, therefore, of freely translating a small portion of the conference into the 
extremely specific word-combinations necessary to minds oriented from childhood to a physical 
science philosophy, even at the risk of losing the more delicate nuances. 

There was one "voice" predominant, and that belonged to the individual known simply as the 
First Speaker. 

Fie said: "It is apparently quite definite now as to what stopped the Mule in his first mad rush. I 
can't say that the matter reflects credit upon ... well, upon the organization of the situation. 
Apparently, he almost located us, by means of the artificially heightened brain-energy of what 
they call a 'psychologist' on the First Foundation. This psychologist was killed just before he 
could communicate his discovery to the Mule. The events leading to that killing were completely 
fortuitous for all calculations below Phase Three. Suppose you take over." 

It was the Fifth Speaker who was indicated by an inflection of the voice. Fie said, in grim 
nuances: "It is certain that the situation was mishandled. We are, of course, highly vulnerable 
under mass attack, particularly an attack led by such a mental phenomenon as the Mule. 

Shortly after he first achieved Galactic eminence with the conquest of the First Foundation, half 
a year after to be exact, he was on Trantor. Within another half year he would have been here 
and the odds would have been stupendously against us - 96.3 plus or minus 0.05% to be 
exact. We have spent considerable time analyzing the forces that stopped him. We know, of 
course, what was driving him on so in the first place. The internal ramifications of his physical 
deformity and mental uniqueness are obvious to all of us. Flowever, it was only through 
penetration to Phase Three that we could determine - after the fact- tbe possibility of his 



anomalous action in the presence of another human being who had an honest affection for him. 

"And since such an anomalous action would depend upon the presence of such another human 
being at the appropriate time, to that extent the whole affair was fortuitous. Our agents are 
certain that it was a girl that killed the Mule's psychologist - a girl for whom the Mule felt trust 
out of sentiment, and whom he, therefore, did not control mentally - simply because she liked 
him. 

"Since that event - and for those who want the details, a mathematical treatment of the subject 
has been drawn up for the Central Library - which warned us, we have held the Mule off by 
unorthodox methods with which we daily risk Seldon's entire scheme of history. That is all." 

The First Speaker paused an instant to allow the individuals assembled to absorb the full 
implications. He said: "The situation is then highly unstable. With Seldon's original scheme bent 
to the fracture point - and I must emphasize that we have blundered badly in this whole matter, 
in our horrible lack of foresight - we are faced with an irreversible breakdown of the Plan. Time 
is passing us by. I think there is only one solution left us - and even that is risky. 

"We must allow the Mule to find us - in a sense." 

Another pause, in which he gathered the reactions, then: "I repeat - in a sense!" 

2 

Two Men without the Mule 

The ship was in near-readiness. Nothing lacked, but the destination. The Mule had suggested a 
return to Trantor - the world that was the bulk of an incomparable Galactic metropolis of the 
hugest Empire mankind had ever known - the dead world that had been capital of all the stars. 

Pritcher disapproved. It was an old path - sucked dry. 

He found Bail Channis in the ship's navigation room. The young man's curly hair was just 
sufficiently disheveled to allow a single curl to droop over the forehead - as if it had been 
carefully placed there - and even teeth showed in a smile that matched it. Vaguely, the stiff 
officer felt himself harden against the other. 

Channis' excitement was evident, "Pritcher, it's too far a coincidence." 

The general said coldly: "I’m not aware of the subject of conversation." 

"Oh- Well, then drag up a chair, old man, and let’s get into it. I've been going over your notes. I 
find them excellent." 

"How ... pleasant that you do." 

"But I’m wondering if you've come to the conclusions I have. Have you ever tried analyzing the 
problem deductively? I mean, it's all very well to comb the stars at random, and to have done all 
you did in five expeditions is quite a bit of star-hopping. That's obvious. But have you calculated 



how long it would take to go through every known world at this rate?" 

"Yes. Several times," Pritcher felt no urge to meet the young man halfway, but there was the 
importance of filching the other's mind - the other's uncontrolled, and hence, unpredictable, 
mind. 

"Well, then, suppose we're analytical about it and try to decide just what we're looking for?" 

"The Second Foundation," said Pritcher, grimly. 

"A Foundation of psychologists," corrected Channis, "who are is weak in physical science as 
the First Foundation was weak in psychology. Well, you're from the First Foundation, which I'm 
not. The implications are probably obvious to you. We must find a world which rules by virtue of 
mental skills, and yet which is very backwards scientifically." 

"Is that necessarily so?" questioned Pritcher, quietly. "Our own ‘Union of Worlds' isn't 
backwards scientifically, even though our ruler owes his strength to his mental powers." 

"Because he has the skills of the First Foundation to draw upon," came the slightly impatient 
answer, "and that is the only such reservoir of knowledge in the Galaxy. The Second 
Foundation must live among the dry crumbs of the broken Galactic Empire. There are no 
pickings there." 

"So then you postulate mental power sufficient to establish their rule over a group of worlds and 
physical helplessness as well?" 

"Comparative physical helplessness. Against the decadent neighboring areas, they are 
competent to defend themselves. Against the resurgent forces of the Mule, with his background 
of a mature atomic economy, they cannot stand. Else, why is their location so well-hidden, both 
at the start by the founder, Hari Seldon, and now by themselves. Your own First Foundation 
made no secret of its existence and did not have it made for them, when they were an 
undefended single city on a lonely planet three hundred years ago." 

The smooth lines of Pritcher's dark face twitched sardonically. 'And now that you've finished 
your deep analysis, would you like a list of all the kingdoms, republics, planet states and 
dictatorships of one sort or another in that political wilderness out there that correspond to your 
description and to several factors besides?" 

"All this has been considered then?" Channis lost none of his brashness. 

"You won't find it here, naturally, but we have a completely worked out guide to the political 
units of the Opposing Periphery. Really, did you suppose the Mule would work entirely 
hit-and-miss?" 

"Well, then" and the young man's voice rose in a burst of energy, "what of the Oligarchy of 
Tazenda?" 

Pritcher touched his ear thoughtfully, "Tazenda? Oh, I think I know it. They're not in the 
Periphery, are they? It seems to me they're fully a third of the way towards the center of the 
Galaxy." 



Yes. What of that? 


"The records we have place the Second Foundation at the other end of the Galaxy. Space 
knows it's the only thing we have to go on. Why talk of Tazenda anyway? Its angular deviation 
from the First Foundation radian is only about one hundred ten to one hundred twenty degrees 
anyway. Nowhere near one hundred eighty." 

"There's another point in the records. The Second Foundation was established at 'Star's End.'" 
"No such region in the Galaxy has ever been located." 

"Because it was a local name, suppressed later for greater secrecy. Or maybe one invented for 
the purpose by Seldon and his group. Yet there's some relationship between 'Star's End' and 
'Tazenda,' don't you think?" 

"A vague similarity in sound? Insufficient." 

'Flave you ever been there?" 

"No." 

"Yet it is mentioned in your records." 

"Where? Oh, yes, but that was merely to take on food and water. There was certainly nothing 
remarkable about the world." 

"Did you land at the ruling planet? The center of government?" 

"I couldn't possibly say." 

Channis brooded about it under the other's cold gaze. Then, "Would you look at the Lens with 
me for a moment?" 

"Certainly." 

The Lens was perhaps the newest feature of the interstellar cruisers of the day. Actually, it was 
a complicated calculating machine which could throw on a screen a reproduction of the night 
sky as seen from any given point of the Galaxy. 

Channis adjusted the co-ordinate points and the wall lights of the pilot room were extinguished. 
In the dim red light at the control board of the Lens, Channis' face glowed ruddily. Pritcher sat in 
the pilot seat, long legs crossed, face lost in the gloom. 

Slowly, as the induction period passed, the points of light brightened on the screen. And then 
they were thick and bright with the generously populated star-groupings of the Galaxy's center. 

"This," explained Channis, "is the winter night-sky as seen from Trantor. That is the important 
point that, as far as I know, has been neglected so far in your search. All intelligent orientation 
must start from Trantor as zero point. Trantor was the capital of the Galactic Empire. Even 
more so scientifically and culturally, than politically. And, therefore, the significance of any 
descriptive name should stem, nine times out of ten, from a Trantorian orientation. You'll 
remember in this connection that, although Seldon was from Helicon, towards the Periphery, 



his group worked on Trantor itself." 

"What is it you're trying to show me?" Pritcher's level voice plunged icily into the gathering 
enthusiasm of the other. 

"The map will explain it. Do you see the dark nebula?" The shadow of his arm fell upon the 
screen, which took on the bespanglement of the Galaxy. The pointing finger ended on a tiny 
patch of black that seemed a hole in the speckled fabric of light. "The stellagraphical records 
call it Pelot's Nebula. Watch it. I'm going to expand the image." 

Pritcher had watched the phenomenon of Lens Image expansion before but he still caught his 
breath. It was like being at the visiplate of a spaceship storming through a horribly crowded 
Galaxy without entering hyperspace. The stars diverged towards them from a common center, 
flared outwards and tumbled off the edge of the screen. Single points became double, then 
globular. Hazy patches dissolved into myriad points. And always that illusion of motion. 

Channis spoke through it all, "You'll notice that we are moving along the direct line from Trantor 
to Pelot's Nebula, so that in effect we are still looking at a stellar orientation equivalent to that of 
Trantor. There is probably a slight error because of the gravitic deviation of light that I haven't 
the math to calculate for, but I'm sure it can't be significant." 

The darkness was spreading over the screen. As the rate of magnification slowed, the stars 
slipped off the four ends of the screen in a regretful leave-taking. At the rims of the growing 
nebula, the brilliant universe of stars shone abruptly in token for that light which was merely 
hidden behind the swirling unradiating atom fragments of sodium and calcium that filled cubic 
parsecs of space. 

And Channis pointed again, "This has been called 'The Mouth' by the inhabitants of that region 
of space. And that is significant because it is only from the Trantorian orientation that it looks 
like a mouth." What he indicated was a rift in the body of the Nebula, shaped like a ragged, 
grinning mouth in profile, outlined by the glazing glory of the starlight with which it was filled. 

"Follow The Mouth.'" said Channis. "Follow 'The Mouth' towards the gullet as it narrows down to 
a thin, splintering line of light. 

Again the screen expanded a trifle, until the Nebula stretched away from "The Mouth" to block 
off all the screen but that narrow trickle and Channis' finger silently followed it down, to where it 
straggled to a halt, and then, as his finger continued moving onward, to a spot where one single 
star sparked lonesomely; and there his finger halted, for beyond that was blackness, 
unrelieved. 

"'Star's End,'" said the young man, simply. "The fabric of the Nebula is thin there and the light of 
that one star finds its way through in just that one direction - to shine on Trantor." 

"You're tying to tell me that-" the voice of the Mule's general died in suspicion. 

"I'm not trying. That is Tazenda - Star's End." 

The lights went on. The Lens flicked off. Pritcher reached Channis in three long strides, "What 
made you think of this?" 



And Channis leaned back in his chair with a queerly puzzled expression on his face. "It was 
accidental. I'd like to take intellectual credit for this, but it was only accidental. In any case, 
however it happens, it fits. According to our references, Tazenda is an oligarchy. It rules 
twenty-seven inhabited planets. It is not advanced scientifically. And most of all, it is an obscure 
world that has adhered to a strict neutrality in the local politics of that stellar region, and is not 
expansionist. I think we ought to see it." 

"Have you informed the Mule of this?" 

"No. Nor shall we. We're in space now, about to make the first hop." 

Pritcher, in sudden horror, sprang to the visiplate. Cold space met his eyes when he adjusted it. 
He gazed fixedly at the view, then turned. Automatically, his hand reached for the hard, 
comfortable curve of the butt of his blaster. 

"By whose order?" 

"By my order, general"- it was the first time Channis had ever used the other's title -"while I 
was engaging you here. You probably felt no acceleration, because it came at the moment I 
was expanding the field of the Lens and you undoubtedly imagined it to be an illusion of the 
apparent star motion." 

"Why? Just what are you doing? What was the point of your nonsense about Tazenda, then?" 

"That was no nonsense. I was completely serious. We're going there. We left today because 
we were scheduled to leave three days from now. General, you don't believe there is a Second 
Foundation, and I do. You are merely following the Mule's orders without faith; I recognize a 
serious danger. The Second Foundation has now had five years to prepare. How they've 
prepared, I don't know, but what if they have agents on Kalgan. If I carry about in my mind the 
knowledge of the whereabouts of the Second Foundation, they may discover that. My life might 
be no longer safe, and I have a great affection for my life. Even on a thin and remote possibility 
such as that, I would rather play safe. So no one knows of Tazenda but you, and you found out 
only after we were out in space. And even so, there is the question of the crew." Channis was 
smiling again, ironically, in obviously complete control of the situation. 

Pritcher's hand fell away from his blaster, and for a moment a vague discomfort pierced him. 
What kept him from action? What deadened him ? There was a time when he was a rebellious 
and unpromoted captain of the First Foundation's commercial empire, when it would have been 
himself rather than Channis who would have taken prompt and daring action such as that. Was 
the Mule right? Was his controlled mind so concerned with obedience as to lose initiative? He 
felt a thickening despondency drive him down into a strange lassitude. 

He said, "Well done! However, you will consult me in the future before making decisions of this 
nature." 

The flickering signal caught his attention. 

"That's the engine room," said Channis, casually. "They warmed up on five minutes' notice and 
I asked them to let me know if there was any trouble. Want to hold the fort?" 



Pritcher nodded mutely, and cogitated in the sudden loneliness on the evils of approaching fifty. 
The visiplate was sparsely starred. The main body of the Galaxy misted one end. What if he 
were free of the Mule's influence- 

But he recoiled in horror at the thought. 

Chief Engineer Huxlani looked sharply at the young, ununiformed man who carried himself with 
the assurance of a Fleet officer and seemed to be in a position of authority. Huxlani, as a 
regular Fleet man from the days his chin had dripped milk, generally confused authority with 
specific insignia. 

But the Mule had appointed this man, and the Mule was, of course, the last word. The only 
word for that matter. Not even subconsciously did he question that. Emotional control went 
deep. 

He handed Channis the little oval object without a word. 

Channis hefted it, and smiled engagingly. 

"You're a Foundation man, aren't you, chief?" 

"Yes, sir. I served in the Foundation Fleet eighteen years before the First Citizen took over." 
"Foundation training in engineering?" 

"Qualified Technician, First Class - Central School on Anacreon." 

"Good enough. And you found this on the communication circuit, where I asked you to look?" 
"Yes, Sir." 

"Does it belong there?" 

"No, Sir." 

"Then what is it?" 

"A hypertracer, sir." 

"That's not enough. I'm not a Foundation man. What is it?" 

"It's a device to allow the ship to be traced through hyperspace." 

"In other words we can be followed anywhere." 

"Yes, Sir." 

"All right. It's a recent invention, isn't it? It was developed by one of the Research Institutes set 
up by the First Citizen, wasn't it?" 

"I believe so, Sir." 

"And its workings are a government secret. Right?" 



"I, believe so, Sir." 

"Yet here it is. Intriguing." 

Channis tossed the hypertracer methodically from hand to hand for a few seconds. Then, 
sharply, he held it out, "Take it, then, and put it back exactly where you found it and exactly how 
you found it. Understand? And then forget this incident. Entirely!" 

The chief choked down his near-automatic salute, turned sharply and left. 

The ship bounded through the Galaxy, its path a wide-spaced dotted line through the stars. The 
dots, referred to, were the scant stretches of ten to sixty light-seconds spent in normal space 
and between them stretched the hundred-and-up light-year gaps that represented the "hops" 
through hyperspace. 

Bail Channis sat at the control panel of the Lens and felt again the involuntary surge of 
near-worship at the contemplation of it. 

He was not a Foundation man and the interplay of forces at the twist of a knob or the breaking 
of a contact was not second nature to him. 

Not that the Lens ought quite to bore even a Foundation man. Within its unbelievably compact 
body were enough electronic circuits to pin- point accurately a hundred million separate stars in 
exact relationship to each other. And as if that were not a feat in itself, it was further capable of 
translating any given portion of the Galactic Field along any of the three spatial axes or to rotate 
any portion of the Field about a center. 

It was because of that, that the Lens had performed a near-revolution in interstellar travel. In 
the younger days of interstellar travel, the calculation of each "hop" through hyperspace meant 
any amount of work from a day to a week - and the larger portion of such work was the more or 
less precise calculation of "Ship's Position" on the Galactic scale of reference. Essentially that 
meant the accurate observation of at least three widely-spaced stars, the position of which, with 
reference to the arbitrary Galactic triple-zero, were known. 

And it is the word "known," that is the catch. To any who know the star field well from one 
certain reference point, stars are as individual as people. Jump ten parsecs, however, and not 
even your own sun is recognizable. It may not even be visible. 

The answer was, of course, spectroscopic analysis. For centuries, the main object of interstellar 
engineering was the analysis of the "light signature" of more and more stars in greater and 
greater detail. With this, and the growing precision of the "hop" itself, standard routes of travel 
through the Galaxy were adopted and interstellar travel became less of an art and more of a 
science. 

And yet, even under the Foundation with improved calculating machines and a new method of 
mechanically scanning the star field for a known "light signature," it sometimes took days to 
locate three stars and then calculate position in regions not previously familiar to the pilot. 

It was the Lens that changed all that. For one thing it required only a single known star. For 
another, even a space tyro such as Channis could operate it. 



The nearest sizable star at the moment was Vincetori, according to "hop" calculations, and on 
the visiplate now, a bright star was centered. Channis hoped that it was Vincetori. 

The field screen of the Lens was thrown directly next that of the visiplate and with careful 
fingers, Channis punched out the co-ordinates of Vincetori. He closed a relay, and the star field 
sprang to bright view. In it, too, a bright star was centered, but otherwise there seemed no 
relationship. He adjusted the Lens along the Z-Axis and expanded the Field to where the 
photometer showed both centered stars to be of equal brightness. 

Channis looked for a second star, sizably bright, on the visiplate and found one on the field 
screen to correspond. Slowly, he rotated the screen to similar angular deflection. He twisted his 
mouth and rejected the result with a grimace. Again he rotated and another bright star was 
brought into position, and a third. And then he grinned. That did it. Perhaps a specialist with 
trained relationship perception might have clicked first try, but he'd settle for three. 

That was the adjustment. In the final step, the two fields overlapped and merged into a sea of 
not-quite-rightness. Most of the stars were close doubles. But the fine adjustment did not take 
long. The double stars melted together, one field remained, and the "Ship's Position" could now 
be read directly off the dials. The entire procedure had taken less than half an hour. 

Channis found Han Pritcher in his private quarters. The general was quite apparently preparing 
for bed. He looked up. 

"News?" 

"Not particularly. We’ll be at Tazenda in another hop." 

"I know." 

"I don't want to bother you if you're turning in, but have you looked through the film we picked 
up in Cil?" 

Han Pritcher cast a disparaging look at the article in question, where it lay in its black case 
upon his low bookshelf, "Yes." 

"And what do you think?" 

"I think that if there was ever any science to History, it has been quite lost in this region of the 
Galaxy." 

Channis grinned broadly, "I know what you mean. Rather barren, isn't it?" 

"Not if you enjoy personal chronicles of rulers. Probably unreachable, I should say, in both 
directions. Where history concerns mainly personalities, the drawings become either black or 
white according to the interests of the writer. I find it all remarkably useless." 

"But there is talk about Tazenda. That's the point I tried to make when I gave you the film. It's 
the only one I could find that even mentioned them." 

"All right. They have good rulers and bad. They've conquered a few planets, won some battles, 
lost a few. There is nothing distinctive about them. I don't think much of your theory, Channis." 



"But you've missed a few points. Didn't you notice that they never formed coalitions? They 
always remained completely outside the politics of this corner of the star swarm. As you say, 
they conquered a few planets, but then they stopped - and that without any startling defeat of 
consequence. It's just as if they spread out enough to protect themselves, but not enough to 
attract attention." 

"Very well," came the unemotional response. "I have no objection to landing. At the worst - a 
little lost time." 

"Oh, no. At the worst - complete defeat. If it is the Second Foundation. Remember it would be 
a world of space-knows-how-many Mules." 

"What do you plan to do?" 

"Land on some minor subject planet. Find out as much as we can about Tazenda first, then 
improvise from that." 

"All right. No objection. If you don't mind now, I would like the light out." 

Channis left with a wave of his hand. 

And in the darkness of a tiny room in an island of driving metal lost in the vastness of space, 
General Flan Pritcher remained awake, following the thoughts that led him through such 
fantastic reaches. 

If everything he had so painfully decided were true - and how all the facts were beginning to fit 
- then Tazenda was the Second Foundation. There was no way out. But how? Flow? 

Could it be Tazenda? An ordinary world? One without distinction? A slum lost amid the 
wreckage of an Empire? A splinter among the fragments? Fie remembered, as from a distance, 
the Mule's shriveled face and his thin voice as he used to speak of the old Foundation 
psychologist, Ebling Mis, the one man who had - maybe - learned the secret of the Second 
Foundation. 

Pritcher recalled the tension of the Mule's words: "It was as if astonishment had overwhelmed 
Mis. It was as though something about the Second Foundation had surpassed all his 
expectations, had driven in a direction completely different from what he might have assumed. 

If I could only have read his thoughts rather than his emotions. Yet the emotions were plain - 
and above everything else was this vast surprise." 

Surprise was the keynote. Something supremely astonishing! And now came this boy, this 
grinning youngster, glibly joyful about Tazenda and its undistinguished subnormality. And he 
had to be right. Fie had\o. Otherwise, nothing made sense. 

Pritcher's last conscious thought had a touch of grimness. That hypertracer along the Etheric 
tube was still there. Fie had checked it one hour back, with Channis well out of the way. 

SECOND INTERLUDE 

It was a casual meeting in the anteroom of the Council Chamber - just a few moments before 



passing into the Chamber to take up the business of the day - and the few thoughts flashed 
back and forth quickly. 

"So the Mule is on his way." 

"That's what I hear, too. Risky! Mighty risky!" 

"Not if affairs adhere to the functions set up." 

"The Mule is not an ordinary man - and it is difficult to manipulate his chosen instruments 
without detection by him. The controlled minds are difficult to touch. They say he's caught on to 
a few cases." 

"Yes, I don't see how that can be avoided." 

"Uncontrolled minds are easier. But so few are in positions of authority under him-" 

They entered the Chamber. Others of the Second Foundation followed them. 

3 

Two Men and a Peasant 

Rossem is one of those marginal worlds usually neglected in Galactic history and scarcely ever 
obtruding itself upon the notice of men of the myriad happier planets. 

In the latter days of the Galactic Empire, a few political prisoners had inhabited its wastes, while 
an observatory and a small Naval garrison served to keep it from complete desertion. Later, in 
the evil days of strife, even before the time of Hari Seldon, the weaker sort of men, tired of the 
periodic decades of insecurity and danger; weary of sacked planets and a ghostly succession 
of ephemeral emperors making their way to the Purple for a few wicked, fruitless years - these 
men fled the populated centers and sought shelter in the barren nooks of the Galaxy. 

Along the chilly wastes of Rossem, villages huddled. Its sun was a small ruddy niggard that 
clutched its dribble of heat to itself, while snow beat thinly down for nine months of the year. 

The tough native grain lay dormant in the soil those snow-filled months, then grew and ripened 
in almost panic speed, when the sun's reluctant radiation brought the temperature to nearly 
fifty. 

Small, goatlike animals cropped the grasslands, kicking the thin snow aside with tiny, tri-hooved 
feet. 

The men of Rossem had, thus, their bread and their milk - and when they could spare an 
animal - even their meat. The darkly ominous forests that gnarled their way over half of the 
equatorial region of the planet supplied a tough, fine-grained wood for housing. This wood, 
together with certain furs and minerals, was even worth exporting, and the ships of the Empire 
came at times and brought in exchange farm machinery, atomic heaters, even televisor sets. 
The last was not really incongruous, for the long winter imposed a lonely hibernation upon the 
peasant. 



Imperial history flowed past the peasants of Rossem. The trading ships might bring news in 
impatient spurts; occasionally new fugitives would arrive - at one time, a relatively large group 
arrived in a body and remained - and these usually had news of the Galaxy. 

It was then that the Rossemites learned of sweeping battles and decimated populations or of 
tyrannical emperors and rebellious viceroys. And they would sigh and shake their heads, and 
draw their fur collars closer about their bearded faces as they sat about the village square in 
the weak sun and philosophized on the evil of men. 

Then after a while, no trading ships arrived at all, and life grew harder. Supplies of foreign, soft 
food, of tobacco, of machinery stopped. Vague word from scraps gathered on the televisor 
brought increasingly disturbing news. And finally it spread that Trantor had been sacked. The 
great capital world of all the Galaxy, the splendid, storied, unapproachable and incomparable 
home of the emperors had been despoiled and ruined and brought to utter destruction. 

It was something inconceivable, and to many of the peasants of Rossem, scratching away at 
their fields, it might well seem that the end of the Galaxy was at hand. 

And then one day not unlike other days a ship arrived again. The old men of each village 
nodded wisely and lifted their old eyelids to whisper that thus it had been in their father's time - 
but it wasn't, quite. 

This ship was not an Imperial ship. The glowing Spaceship-and-Sun of the Empire was missing 
from its prow. It was a stubby affair made of scraps of older ships - and the men within called 
themselves soldiers of Tazenda. 

The peasants were confused. They had not heard of Tazenda, but they greeted the soldiers 
nevertheless in the traditional fashion of hospitality. The newcomers inquired closely as to the 
nature of the planet, the number of its inhabitants, the number of its cities - a word mistaken by 
the peasants to mean "villages" to the confusion of all concerned - its type of economy and so 
on. 

Other ships came and proclamations were issued all over the world that Tazenda was now the 
ruling world, that tax-collecting stations would be established girdling the equator - the 
inhabited region - that percentages of grain and furs according to certain numerical formulae 
would be collected annually. 

The Rossemites had blinked solemnly, uncertain of the word "taxes." When collection time 
came, many had paid, or had stood by in confusion while the uniformed, other-wordlings loaded 
the harvested corn and the pelts on to the broad ground-cars. 

Here and there indignant peasants banded together and brought out ancient hunting weapons 
- but of this nothing ever came. Grumblingly they had disbanded when the men of Tazenda 
came and with dismay watched their hard struggle for existence become harder. 

But a new equilibrium was reached. The Tazendian governor lived dourly in the village of 
Gentri, from which all Rossemites were barred. He and the officials under him were dim 
otherworld beings that rarely impinged on the Rossemite ken. The tax-farmers, Rossemites in 
the employ of Tazenda, came periodically, but they were creatures of custom now - and the 



peasant had learned how to hide his grain and drive his cattle into the forest, and refrain from 
having his hut appear too ostentatiously prosperous. Then with a dull, uncomprehending 
expression he would greet all sharp questioning as to his assets by merely pointing at what 
they could see. 

Even that grew less, and taxes decreased, almost as If Tazenda wearied of extorting pennies 
from such a world. 

Trading sprang up and perhaps Tazenda found that more profitable. The men of Rossem no 
longer received in exchange the polished creations of the Empire, but even Tazendian 
machines and Tazendian food was better than the native stuff. And there were clothes for the 
women of other than gray home-spun, which was a very important thing. 

So once again, Galactic history glided past peacefully enough, and the peasants scrabbled life 
out of the hard soil. 

Narovi blew into his beard as he stepped out of his cottage. 

The first snows were sifting across the hard ground and the sky was a dull, overcast pink. He 
squinted carefully upward and decided that no real storm was in sight. He could travel to Gentri 
without much trouble and get rid of his surplus grain in return for enough canned foods to last 
the winter. 

He roared back through the door, which he opened a crack for the purpose: "Has the car been 
fed its fuel, yunker?" 

A voice shouted from within, and then Narovi's oldest son, his short, red beard not yet 
completely outgrown its boyish sparseness, joined him. 

"The car," he said, sullenly, "is fueled and rides well, but for the bad condition of the axles. For 
that I am of no blame. I have told you it needs expert repairs." 

The old man stepped back and surveyed his son through lowering eyebrows, then thrust his 
hairy chin outward: "And is the fault mine? Where and in what manner may I achieve expert 
repairs? Has the harvest then been anything but scanty for five years? Have my herds escaped 
the pest? Have the pelts climbed of themselves-" 

"Narovi!" The well-known voice from within stopped him in mid-word. He grumbled, "Well, well - 
and now your mother must insert herself into the affairs of a father and his son. Bring out the 
car, and see to it that the storage trailers are securely attached." 

He pounded his gloved hands together, and looked upward again. The dimly-ruddy clouds were 
gathering and the gray sky that showed in the rifts bore no warmth. The sun was hidden. 

He was at the point of looking away, when his dropping eyes caught and his finger almost 
automatically rose on high while his mouth fell open in a shout, in complete disregard of the 
cold air. 

"Wife," he called vigorously, "Old woman - come here." 

An indignant head appeared at a window. The woman's eyes followed his finger, gaped. With a 



cry, she dashed down the wooden stairs, snatching up an old wrap and a square of linen as 
she went. She emerged with the linen wrapped insecurely over her head and ears, and the 
wrap dangling from her shoulders. 

She snuffled: "It is a ship from outer space." 

And Narovi remarked impatiently: "And what else could it be? We have visitors, old woman, 
visitors!" 

The ship was sinking slowly to a landing on the bare frozen field in the northern portions of 
Narovi's farm. 

"But what shall we do?" gasped the woman. "Can we offer these people hospitality? Is the dirt 
floor of our hovel to be theirs and the pickings of last week's hoecake?" 

"Shall they then go to our neighbors?" Narovi purpled past the crimson induced by the cold and 
his arms in their sleek fur covering lunged out and seized the woman's brawny shoulders. 

"Wife of my soul," he purred, "you will take the two chairs from our room downstairs; you will 
see that a fat youngling is slaughtered and roasted with tubers; you will bake a fresh hoecake. I 
go now to greet these men of power from outer space ... and ... and-" He paused, placed his 
great cap awry, and scratched hesitantly. "Yes, I shall bring my jug of brewed grain as well. 
Hearty drink is pleasant." 

The woman's mouth had flapped idly during this speech. Nothing came out. And when that 
stage passed, it was only a discordant screech that issued. 

Narovi lifted a finger, "Old woman, what was it the village Elders said a se'nnight since? Eh? 

Stir your memory. The Elders went from farm to farm - themselves! Imagine the importance of 
it! - to ask us that should any ships from outer space land, they were to be informed 
immediately on the orders of the governor. 

"And now shall I not seize the opportunity to win into the good graces of those in power? 

Regard that ship. Have you ever seen its like? These men from the outer worlds are rich, great. 
The governor himself sends such urgent messages concerning them that the Elders walk from 
farm to farm in the cooling weather. Perhaps the message is sent throughout all Rossem that 
these men are greatly desired by the Lords of Tazenda - and it is on my farm that they are 
landing." 

He fairly hopped for anxiety, "The proper hospitality now - the mention of my name to the 
governor - and what may not be ours?" 

His wife was suddenly aware of the cold biting through her thin house-clothing. She leaped 
towards the door, shouting over her shoulders, "Leave then quickly." 

But she was speaking to a man who was even then racing towards the segment of the horizon 
against which the ship sank. 

Neither the cold of the world, nor its bleak, empty spaces worried General Han Pritcher. Nor the 
poverty of their surroundings, nor the perspiring peasant himself. 



What did bother him was the question of the wisdom of their tactics? He and Channis were 
alone here. 


The ship, left in space, could take care of itself in ordinary circumstances, but still, he felt 
unsafe. It was Channis, of course, who was responsible for this move. He looked across at the 
young man and caught him winking cheerfully at the gap in the furred partition, in which a 
woman's peeping eyes and gaping mouth momentarily appeared. 

Channis, at least, seemed completely at ease. That fact Pritcher savored with a vinegary 
satisfaction. His game had not much longer to proceed exactly as he wished it. Yet, meanwhile 
their wrist ultrawave sender-receivers were their only connection with the ship. 

And then the peasant host smiled enormously and bobbed his head several times and said in a 
voice oily with respect, "Noble Lords, I crave leave to tell you that my eldest son - a good, 
worthy lad whom my poverty prevents from educating as his wisdom deserves - has informed 
me that the Elders will arrive soon. I trust your stay here has been as pleasant as my humble 
means - for I am poverty-stricken, though a hard-working, honest, and humble farmer, as 
anyone here will tell you - could afford." 

"Elders?" said Channis, lightly. "The chief men of the region here?" 

"So they are, Noble Lords, and honest, worthy men all of them, for our entire village is known 
throughout Rossem as a just and righteous spot - though living is hard and the returns of the 
fields and forests meager. Perhaps you will mention to the Elders, Noble Lords, of my respect 
and honor for travelers and it may happen that they will request a new motor wagon for our 
household as the old one can scarcely creep and upon the remnant of it depends our 
livelihood." 

He looked humbly eager and Han Pritcher nodded with thee properly aloof condescension 
required of the role of "Noble, Lords" bestowed upon them. 

"A report of your hospitality shall reach the ears of your Elders." 

Pritcher seized the next moments of isolation to speak to the apparently half-sleeping Channis. 

"I am not particularly fond of this meeting of the Elders," he said. "Have you any thoughts on 
the subject?" 

Channis seemed surprised. "No. What worries you?" 

"It seems we have better things to do than to become conspicuous here.' 

Channis spoke hastily, in a low monotoned voice: "It may be necessary to risk becoming 
conspicuous in our next moves. We won't find the type of men we want, Pritcher, by simply 
reaching out a hand into a dark bag and groping. Men who rule by tricks of the mind need not 
necessarily be men in obvious power. In the first place, the psychologists of the Second 
Foundation are probably a very small minority of the total population, just as on your own First 
Foundation, the technicians and scientists formed a minority. The ordinary inhabitants are 
probably just that - very ordinary. The psychologists may even be well hidden, and the men in 
the apparently ruling position, may honestly think they are the true masters. Our solution to that 



problem may be found here on this frozen lump of a planet." 

"I don't follow that at all." 

"Why, see here, it's obvious enough. Tazenda is probably a huge world of millions or hundreds 
of millions. How could we identify the psychologists among them and be able to report truly to 
the Mule that we have located the Second Foundation? But here, on this tiny peasant world 
and subject planet, an the Tazendian rulers, our host informs us, are concentrated in their chief 
village of Gentri. There may be only a few hundred of them there, Pritcher, and among them 
must be one or more of the men of the Second Foundation. We will go there eventually, but let 
us see the Elders first - it's a logical step on the way." 

They drew apart easily, as their black-bearded host tumbled into the room again, obviously 
agitated. 

"Noble Lords, the Elders are arriving. I crave leave to beg you once more to mention a word, 
perhaps, on my behalf-" He almost bent double in a paroxysm of fawning. 

"We shall certainly remember you," said Channis. "Are these your Elders?" 

They apparently were. There were three. 

One approached. He bowed with a dignified respect and said: "We are honored. Transportation 
has been provided, Respected sirs, and we hope for the pleasure of your company at our 
Meeting Hall." 


THIRD INTERLUDE 

The First Speaker gazed wistfully at the night sky. Wispy clouds scudded across the faint 
stargleams. Space looked actively hostile. It was cold and awful at best but now it contained 
that strange creature, the Mule, and the very content seemed to darken and thicken it into 
ominous threat. 

The meeting was over. It had not been long. There had been the doubts and questionings 
inspired by the difficult mathematical problem of dealing with a mental mutant of uncertain 
makeup. All the extreme permutations had had to be considered. 

Were they even yet certain? Somewhere in this region of space - within reaching distance as 
Galactic spaces go - was the Mule. What would he do? 

It was easy enough to handle his men. They reacted - and were reacting - according to plan. 
But what of the Mule himself? 


4 



Two Men and the Elders 

The Elders of this particular region of Rossem were not exactly what one might have expected. 
They were not a mere extrapolation of the peasantry; older, more authoritative, less friendly. 

Not at all. 

The dignity that had marked them at first meeting had grown in impression till it had reached 
the mark of being their predominant characteristic. 

They sat about their oval table like so many grave and slow-moving thinkers. Most were a trifle 
past their physical prime, though the few who possessed beards wore them short and neatly 
arranged. Still, enough appeared younger than forty to make it quite obvious that "Elders" was 
a term of respect rather than entirely a literal description of age. 

The two from outer space were at the head of the table and in the solemn silence that 
accompanied a rather frugal meal that seemed ceremonious rather than nourishing, absorbed 
the new, contrasting atmosphere. 

After the meal and after one or two respectful remarks - too short and simple to be called 
speeches - had been made by those of the Elders apparently held most in esteem, an 
informality forced itself upon the assembly. 

It was as if the dignity of greeting foreign personages had finally given way to the amiable rustic 
qualities of curiosity and friendliness. 

They crowded around the two strangers and the flood of questions came. 

They asked if it were difficult to handle a spaceship, how many men were required for the job, if 
better motors could be made for their ground-cars, if it was true that it rarely snowed on other 
worlds as was said to be the case with Tazenda, how many people lived on their world, if it was 
as large as Tazenda, if it was far away, how their clothes were woven and what gave them the 
metallic shimmer, why they did not wear furs, if they shaved every day, what sort of stone that 
was in Pritcher's ring - The list stretched out. 

And almost always the questions were addressed to Pritcher as though, as the elder, they 
automatically invested him with the greater authority. Pritcher found himself forced to answer at 
greater and greater length. It was like an immersion in a crowd of children. Their questions 
were those of utter and disarming wonder. Their eagerness to know was completely irresistible 
and would not be denied. 

Pritcher explained that spaceships were not difficult to handle and that crews varied with the 
size, from one to many, that the motors of their ground-cars were unknown in detail to him but 
could doubtless be improved, that the climates of worlds varied almost infinitely, that many 
hundreds of millions lived on his world but that it was far smaller and more insignificant than the 
great empire of Tazenda, that their clothes were woven of silicone plastics in which metallic 
luster was artificially produced by proper orientation of the surface molecules, and that they 
could be artificially heated so that furs were unnecessary, that they shaved every day, that the 
stone in his ring was an amethyst. The list stretched out. He found himself thawing to these 



naive provincials against his will. 

And always as he answered there was a rapid chatter among the Elders, as though they 
debated the information gained. It was difficult to follow these inner discussions of theirs for 
they lapsed into their own accented version of the universal Galactic language that, through 
long separation from the currents of living speech, had become archaic. 

Almost, one might say, their curt comments among themselves hovered on the edge of 
understanding, but just managed to elude the clutching tendrils of comprehension. 

Until finally Channis interrupted to say, "Good sirs, you must answer us for a while, for we are 
strangers and would be very much interested to know all we can of Tazenda." 

And what happened then was that a great silence fell and each of the hitherto voluble Elders 
grew silent. Their hands, which had been moving in such rapid and delicate accompaniment to 
their words as though to give them greater scope and varied shades of meaning, fell suddenly 
limp. They stared furtively at one another, apparently quite willing each to let the other have all 
the floor. 

Pritcher interposed quickly, "My companion asks this in friendliness, for the fame of Tazenda 
fills the Galaxy and we, of course, shall inform the governor of the loyalty and love of the Elders 
of Rossem." 

No sigh of relief was heard but faces brightened. An Elder stroked his beard with thumb and 
forefinger, straightening its slight curl with a gentle pressure, and said: "We are faithful servants 
of the Lords of Tazenda." 

Pritcher's annoyance at Channis' bald question subsided. It was apparent, at least, that the age 
that he had felt creeping over him of late had not yet deprived him of his own capacity for 
making smooth the blunders of others. 

He continued: "We do not know, in our far part of the universe, much of the past history of the 
Lords of Tazenda. We presume they have ruled benevolently here for a long time." 

The same Elder who spoke before, answered. In a soft, automatic way he had become 
spokesman. He said: "Not the grandfather of the oldest can recall a time in which the Lords 
were absent." 

"It has been a time of peace?" 

"It has been a time of peace!" He hesitated. "The governor is a strong and powerful Lord who 
would not hesitate to punish traitors. None of us are traitors, of course." 

"He has punished some in the past, I imagine, as they deserve." 

Again hesitation, "None here have ever been traitors, or our fathers or our fathers' fathers. But 
on other worlds, there have been such, and death followed for them quickly. It is not good to 
think of for we are humble men who are poor farmers and not concerned with matters of 
politics." 

The anxiety in his voice, the universal concern in the eyes of all of them was obvious. 



Pritcher said smoothly: "Could you inform us as to how we can arrange an audience with your 
governor." 

And instantly an element of sudden bewilderment entered the situation. 

For after a long moment, the elder said: "Why, did you not know? The governor will be here 
tomorrow. He has expected you. It has been a great honor for us. We ... we hope earnestly that 
you will report to him satisfactorily as to our loyalty to him." 

Pritcher's smile scarcely twitched. "Expected us?" 

The Elder looked wonderingly from one to the other. "Why ... it is now a week since we have 
been waiting for you." 

Their quarters were undoubtedly luxurious for the world. Pritcher had lived in worse. Channis 
showed nothing but indifference to externals. 

But there was an element of tension between them of a different nature than hitherto. Pritcher, 
felt the time approaching for a definite decision and yet there was still the desirability of 
additional waiting. To see the governor first would be to increase the gamble to dangerous 
dimensions and yet to win that gamble might multi-double the winnings. He felt a surge of 
anger at the slight crease between Channis' eyebrows, the delicate uncertainty with which the 
young man's lower lip presented itself to an upper tooth. He detested the useless play-acting 
and yearned for an end to it. 

He said: "We seem to be anticipated." 

'Yes," said Channis, simply. 

"Just that? You have no contribution of greater pith to make. We come here and find that the 
governor expects us. Presumably we shall find from the governor that Tazenda itself expects 
us. Of what value then is our entire mission?" 

Channis looked up, without endeavoring to conceal the weary note in his voice: "To expect us 
is one thing; to know who we are and what we came for, is another." 

"Do you expect to conceal these things from men of the Second Foundation?" 

"Perhaps. Why not? Are you ready to throw your hand in? Suppose our ship was detected in 
space. Is it unusual for a realm to maintain frontier observation posts? Even if we were ordinary 
strangers, we would be of interest." 

"Sufficient interest for a governor to come to us rather than the reverse?' 

Channis shrugged: "We’ll have to meet that problem later. Let us see what this governor is 
like." 

Pritcher bared his teeth in a bloodless kind of scowl. The situation was becoming ridiculous. 

Channis proceeded with an artificial animation: "At least we know one thing. Tazenda is the 
Second Foundation or a million shreds of evidence are unanimously pointing the wrong way. 



How do you interpret the obvious terror in which these natives hold Tazenda? I see no signs of 
political domination. Their groups of Elders apparently meet freely and without interference of 
any sort. The taxation they speak of doesn't seem at all extensive to me or efficiently carried 
through. The natives speak much of poverty but seem sturdy and well-fed. The houses are 
uncouth and their villages rude, but are obviously adequate for the purpose. 

"In fact, the world fascinates me. I have never seen a more forbidding one, yet I am convinced 
there is no suffering among the population and that their uncomplicated lives manage to 
contain a well-balanced happiness lacking in the sophisticated populations of the advanced 
centers." 

"Are you an admirer of peasant virtues, then?" 

"The stars forbid." Channis seemed amused at the idea. "I merely point out the significance of 
all this. Apparently, Tazenda is an efficient administrator - efficient in a sense far different from 
the efficiency of the old Empire or of the First Foundation, or even of our own Union. All these 
have brought mechanical efficiency to their subjects at the cost of more intangible values. 
Tazenda brings happiness and sufficiency. Don't you see that the whole orientation of their 
domination is different? It is not physical, but psychological." 

"Really?" Pritcher, allowed himself irony. "And the terror with which the Elders spoke of the 
punishment of treason by these kind hearted psychologist administrators? How does that suit 
your thesis?" 

"Were they the objects of the punishment? They speak of punishment only of others. It is as if 
knowledge of punishment has been so well implanted in them that punishment itself need never 
be used. The proper mental attitudes are so inserted into their minds that I am certain that not a 
Tazendian soldier exists on the planet. Don't you see all this?" 

"I’ll see perhaps," said Pritcher, coldly, "when I see the governor. And what, by the way, if our 
mentalities are handled?" 

Channis replied with brutal contempt: "You should be accustomed to that." 

Pritcher whitened perceptibly, and, with an effort, turned away. They spoke to one another no 
more that day. 

It was in the silent windlessness of the frigid night, as he listened to the soft, sleeping motions 
of the other, that Pritcher silently adjusted his wrist-transmitter to the ultrawave region for which 
Channis' was unadjustable and, with noiseless touches of his fingernail, contacted the ship. 

The answer came in little periods of noiseless vibration that barely lifted themselves above the 
sensory threshold. 

Twice Pritcher asked: "Any communications at all yet?" 

Twice the answer came: "None. We wait always." 

He got out of bed. It was cold in the room and he pulled the furry blanket around him as he sat 
in the chair and stared out at the crowding stars so different in the brightness and complexity of 



their arrangement from the even fog of the Galactic Lens that dominated the night sky of his 
native Periphery. 

Somewhere there between the stars was the answer to the complications that overwhelmed 
him, and he felt the yearning for that solution to arrive and end things. 

For a moment he wondered again if the Mule were right - if Conversion had robbed him of the 
firm sharp edge of self-reliance. Or was it simply age and the fluctuations of these last years? 

He didn't really care. 

He was tired. 

The governor of Rossem arrived with minor ostentation. His only companion was the uniformed 
man at the controls of the ground-car. 

The ground-car itself was of lush design but to Pritcher it appeared inefficient. It turned 
clumsily; more than once it apparently balked at what might have been a too-rapid change of 
gears. It was obvious at once from its design that it ran on chemical, and not on atomic, fuel. 

The Tazendian governor stepped softly on to the thin layer of snow and advanced between two 
lines of respectful Elders. He did not look at them but entered quickly. They followed after him. 

From the quarters assigned to them, the two men of the Mule's Union watched. He - the 
governor -was thickset, rather stocky, short, unimpressive. 

But what of that? 

Pritcher cursed himself for a failure of nerve. His face, to be sure, remained icily calm. There 
was no humiliation before Channis - but he knew very well that his blood pressure had 
heightened and his throat had become dry. 

It was not a case of physical fear. He was not one of those dull-witted, unimaginative men of 
nerveless meat who were too stupid ever to be afraid - but physical fear he could account for 
and discount. 

But this was different. It was the other fear. 

He glanced quickly at Channis. The young man glanced idly at the nails of one hand and poked 
leisurely at some trifling unevenness. 

Something inside Pritcher became vastly indignant. What had Channis to fear of mental 
handling? 

Pritcher caught a mental breath and tried to think back. How had he been before the Mule had 
Converted him from the die-hard Democrat that he was. It was hard to remember. He could not 
place himself mentally. He could not break the clinging wires that bound him emotionally to the 
Mule. Intellectually, he could remember that he had once tried to assassinate the Mule but not 
for all the straining he could endure, could he remember his emotions at the time. That might 
be the self-defense of his own mind, however, for at the intuitive thought of what those 
emotions might have been - not realizing the details, but merely comprehending the drift of it - 



his stomach grew queasy. 

What if the governor tampered with his mind? 

What if the insubstantial mental tendrils of a Second Foundationer insinuated itself down the 
emotional crevices of his makeup and pulled them apart and rejoined them? 

There had been no sensation the first time. There had been no pain, no mental jar - not even a 
feeling of discontinuity. He had always loved the Mule. If there had ever been a time long 
before - as long before as five short years - when he had thought he hadn't loved him, that he 
had hated him - that was just a horrid illusion. The thought of that illusion embarrassed him. 

But there had been no pain. 

Would meeting the governor duplicate that? Would all that had gone before - all his service for 
the Mule - all his life's orientation - join the hazy, other-life dream that held the word, 
Democracy. The Mule also a dream, and only to Tazenda, his loyalty— 

Sharply, he turned away. 

There was that strong desire to retch. 

And then Channis' voice clashed on his ear, "I think this is it, general." 

Pritcher turned again. An Elder had opened the door silently and stood with a dignified and 
calm respect upon the threshold. 

He said, "His Excellency, Governor of Rossem, in the name of the Lords of Tazenda, is pleased 
to present his permission for an audience and request your appearance before him." 

"Sure thing," and Channis tightened his belt with a jerk and adjusted a Rossemian hood over 
his head. 

Pritcher's jaw set. This was the beginning of the real gamble. 

The governor of Rossem was not of formidable appearance. For one thing, he was 
bareheaded, and his thinning hair, light brown, tending to gray, lent him mildness. His bony 
eye-ridges lowered at them, and his eyes, set in a fine network of surrounding wrinkles, 
seemed calculating, but his fresh-cropped chin was soft and small and, by the universal 
convention of followers of the pseudoscience of reading character by facial bony structure, 
seemed "weak." 

Pritcher, avoided the eyes and watched the chin. He didn't know whether that would be 
effective - if anything would be. 

The governor's voice was high-pitched, indifferent: "Welcome to Tazenda. We greet you in 
peace. You have eaten?" 

His hand - long fingers, gnarled veins - waved almost regally at the U-shaped table. 

They bowed and sat down. The governor sat at the outer side of the base of the U, they on the 
inner; along both arms sat the double row of silent Elders. 



The governor spoke in short, abrupt sentences - praising the food as Tazendian importations - 
and it had indeed a quality different if, somehow, not so much better, than the rougher food of 
the Elders - disparaging Rossemian weather, referring with an attempt at casualness to the 
intricacies of space travel. 

Channis talked little. Pritcher not at all. 

Then it was over. The small, stewed fruits were finished; the napkins used and discarded, and 
the governor leaned back. 

His small eyes sparkled. 

"I have inquired as to your ship. Naturally, I would like to see that it receives due care and 
overhaul. I am told its whereabouts are unknown." 

"True." Channis replied lightly. "We have left it in space. It is a large ship, suitable for long 
journeys in sometimes hostile regions, and we felt that landing it here might give rise to doubts 
as to our peaceful intentions. We preferred to land alone, unarmed." 

"A friendly act," commented the governor, without conviction. "A large ship, you say?" 

"Not a vessel of war, excellency." 

"Ha, hum. Where is it you come from?" 

"A small world of the Santanni sector, your excellency. It may be you are not aware of its 
existence for it lacks importance. We are interested in establishing trade relationships." 

"Trade, eh? And what have you to sell?' 

"Machines of all sorts, excellency. In return, food, wood, ores 

"Ha, hum." The governor seemed doubtful. "I know little these matters. Perhaps mutual profit 
may be arranged. Perhaps, after I have examined your credentials at length - for much 
information will be required by my government before matters may proceed, you understand - 
and after I have looked over your ship, it would be advisable for you to proceed to Tazenda." 

There was no answer to that, and the governor's attitude iced perceptibly. 

"It is necessary that I see your ship, however." 

Channis said distantly: "The ship, unfortunately, is undergoing repairs at the moment. If your 
excellency would not object giving us forty-eight hours, it will be at your service." 

"I am not accustomed to waiting." 

For the first time, Pritcher met the glare of the other, eye to eye, and his breath exploded softly 
inside him. For a moment, he had the sensation of drowning, but then his eyes tore away. 

Channis did not waver. He said: "The ship cannot be landed for forty-eight hours, excellency. 
We are here and unarmed. Can you doubt our honest intentions?" 



There was a long silence, and then the governor said gruffly, "Tell me of the world from which 
you come." 

That was all. It passed with that. There was no more unpleasantness. The governor, having 
fulfilled his official duty, apparently lost interest and the audience died a dull death. 

And when it was all over, Pritcher found himself back in their quarters and took stock of himself. 

Carefully - holding his breath - he "felt" his emotions. Certainly he seemed no different to 
himself, but would he feel any difference? Had he felt different after the Mule's Conversion? 

Had not everything seemed natural? As it should have been? 

He experimented. 

With cold purpose, he shouted inside the silent caverns of his mind, and the shout was, "The 
Second Foundation must be discovered and destroyed." 

And the emotion that accompanied it was honest hate. There was not as much as a hesitation 
involved in it. 

And then it was in his mind to substitute the word "Mule" for the phrase "Second Foundation" 
and his breath caught at the mere emotion and his tongue clogged. 

So far, good. 

But had he been handled otherwise - more subtly? Had tiny changes been made? Changes 
that he couldn't detect because their very existence warped his judgment. 

There was no way to tell. 

But he still felt absolute loyalty to the Mule! If that were unchanged, nothing else really 
mattered. 

He turned his mind to action again. Channis was busy at his end of the room. Pritcher's 
thumbnail idled at his wrist communicator. 

And then at the response that came he felt a wave of relief surge over him and leave him weak. 

The quiet muscles of his face did not betray him, but inside he was shouting with joy - and 
when Channis turned to face him, he knew that the farce was about over. 

FOURTH INTERLUDE 

The two Speakers passed each other on the road and one stopped the other. 

"I have word from the First Speaker." 

There was a half-apprehensive flicker in the other's eyes. "Intersection point?" 

"Yes! May we live to see the dawn!" 



5 

One Man and the Mule 

There was no sign in any of Channis' actions that he was aware of any subtle change in the 
attitude of Pritcher, and in their relations to each other. He leaned back on the hard wooden 
bench and spread-eagled his feet out in front of him. 

"What did you make of the governor?" 

Pritcher shrugged: "Nothing at all. He certainly seemed no mental genius to me. A very poor 
specimen of the Second Foundation, if that's what he was supposed to be." 

"I don't think he was, you know. I'm not sure what to make of it. Suppose you were a Second 
Foundationer," Channis grew thoughtful, "what would yoi/do? Suppose you had an idea of our 
purpose here. How would you handle us?" 

"Conversion, of course." 

"Like the Mule?" Channis looked up, sharply. "Would we know if they had converted us? I 
wonder- And what if they were simply psychologists, but very clever ones." 

"In that case, I'd have us killed rather quickly." 

"And our ship? No." Channis wagged a forefinger. "We're playing a bluff, Pritcher, old man. It 
can only be a bluff. Even if they have emotional control down pat, we - you and I - are only 
fronts. It's the Mule they must fight, and they're being just as careful of us as we are of them. 

I'm assuming that they know who we are." 

Pritcher, stared coldly: "What do you intend doing?" 

"Wait." The word was bitten off. "Let them come to us. They're worried, maybe about the ship, 
but probably about the Mule. They bluffed with the governor. It didn't work. We stayed pat. The 
next person they'll send will be a Second Foundationer, and he’ll propose a deal of some sort." 

"And then?" 

"And then we make the deal." 

"I don't think so." 

"Because you think it will double-cross the Mule? It won't." 

"No, the Mule could handle your double-crosses, any you could invent. But I still don't think so." 
"Because you think then we couldn't double-cross the Foundationers?" 

"Perhaps not. But that’s not the reason." 

Channis let his glance drop to what the other held in his fist, and said grimly: "You mean that's 
the reason." 



Pritcher cradled his blaster, "That's right. You are under arrest." 

"Why?" 

"For treason to the First Citizen of the Union." 

Channis' lips hardened upon one another: "What's going on?" 

"Treason! As I said. And correction of the matter, on my part." 

"Your proof? Or evidence, assumptions, daydreams? Are you mad?" 

"No. Are you? Do you think the Mule sends out unweaned youngsters on ridiculous 
swashbuckling missions for nothing? It was queer to me at the time. But I wasted time in 
doubting myself. Why should he send you? Because you smile and dress well? Because you're 
twenty-eight." 

"Perhaps because I can be trusted. Or aren't you in the market for logical reasons?" 

"Or perhaps because you can't be trusted. Which is logical enough, as it turns out." 

"Are we matching paradoxes, or is this all a word game to see who can say the least in the 
most words?" 

And the blaster advanced, with Pritcher after it. Fie stood erect before the younger man: "Stand 
up!" 

Channis did so, in no particular hurry, and felt the muzzle of the blaster touch his belt with no 
shrinking of the stomach muscles. 

Pritcher said: "What the Mule wanted was to find the Second Foundation. Fie had failed and I 
had failed, and the secret that neither of us can find is a well-hidden one. So there was one 
outstanding possibility left - and that was to find a seeker who ready knew the hiding-place." 

"Is that I?" 

"Apparently it was. I didn't know then, of course, but though my mind must be slowing, it still 
points in the right direction. Flow easily we found Star's End! Flow miraculously you examined 
the correct Field Region of the Lens from among an infinite number of possibles! And having 
done so, how nicely we observe just the correct point for observation! You clumsy fool! Did you 
so underestimate me that no combination of impossible fortuties struck you as being too much 
for me to swallow?" 

"You mean I've been too successful?" 

"Too successful by half for any loyal man." 

"Because the standards of success you set me were so low?" 