
"Oh? And to what effect?" 

"He has spied out the land of these barbarians and advocates an expedition in force. His 
arguments are long and fairly tedious. It is not worth annoying Your Imperial Majesty with it at 
present, during your indisposition. Particularly since it will be discussed at length during the 
session of the Council of Lords." He glanced sidewise at the Emperor. 

Cleon II frowned. "The Lords? Is it a question for them, Brodrig? It will mean further demands 
for a broader interpretation of the Charter. It always comes to that." 

"It can't be avoided, sire. It might have been better if your august father could have beaten 
down the last rebellion without granting the Charter. But since it is here, we must endure it for 
the while." 

"You're right, I suppose. Then the Lords it must be. But why all this solemnity, man? It is, after 
all, a minor point. Success on a remote border with limited troops is scarcely a state affair." 

Brodrig smiled narrowly. He said coolly, "It is an affair of a romantic idiot; but even a romantic 
idiot can be a deadly weapon when an unromantic rebel uses him as a tool. Sire, the man was 
popular here and is popular there. He is young. If he annexes a vagrant barbarian planet or 
two, he will become a conqueror. Now a young conqueror who has proven his ability to rouse 
the enthusiasm of pilots, miners, tradesmen and suchlike rabble is dangerous at any time. Even 
if he lacked the desire to do to you as your august father did to the usurper, Ricker, then one of 
our loyal Lords of the Domain may decide to use him as his weapon." 

Cleon II moved an arm hastily and stiffened with pain. Slowly he relaxed, but his smile was 
weak, and his voice a whisper. "You are a valuable subject, Brodrig. You always suspect far 
more than is necessary, and I have but to take half your suggested precautions to be utterly 
safe. We'll put it up to the Lords. We shall see what they say and take our measure accordingly. 
The young man, I suppose, has made no hostile moves yet." 



"He report none. But already he asks for reinforcements." 

"Reinforcements!" The Emperor's eyes narrowed with wonder. "What force has he?" 

"Ten ships of the line, sire, with a full complement of auxiliary vessels. Two of the ships are 
equipped with motors salvaged from the old Grand Fleet, and one has a battery of power 
artillery from the same source. The other ships are new ones of the last fifty years, but are 
serviceable, nevertheless." 

"Ten ships would seem adequate for any reasonable undertaking. Why, with less than ten ships 
my father won his first victories against the usurper. Who are these barbarians he's fighting?" 

The Privy Secretary raised a pair of supercilious eyebrows. "He refers to them as 'the 
Foundation.'" 

"The Foundation? What is it?" 

"There is no record of it, sire. I have searched the archives carefully. The area of the Galaxy 
indicated falls within the ancient province of Anacreon, which two centuries since gave itself up 
to brigandage, barbarism, and anarchy. There is no planet known as Foundation in the 
province, however. There was a vague reference to a group of scientists sent to that province 
just before its separation from our protection. They were to prepare an Encyclopedia." He 
smiled thinly. "I believe they called it the Encyclopedia Foundation." 

"Well," the Emperor considered it somberly, "that seems a tenuous connection to advance." 

"I'm not advancing it, sire. No word was ever received from that expedition after the growth of 
anarchy in that region. If their descendants still live and retain their name, then they have 
reverted to barbarism most certainly." 

"And so he wants reinforcements." The Emperor bent a fierce glance at his secretary. "This is 
most peculiar; to propose to fight savages with ten ships and to ask for more before a blow is 
struck. And yet I begin to remember this Riose; he was a handsome boy of loyal family. 

Brodrig, there are complications in this that I don't penetrate. There may be more importance in 
it than would seem." 

His fingers played idly with the gleaming sheet that covered his stiffened legs. He said, "I need 
a man out there; one with eyes, brains and loyalty. Brodrig-" 

The secretary bent a submissive head. "And the ships, sire?" 

"Not yet!" The Emperor moaned softly as he shifted his position in gentle stages. He pointed a 
feeble finger, "Not till we know more. Convene the Council of Lords for this day week. It will be 
a good opportunity for the new appropriation as well. I'll put that through or lives will end." 

He leaned his aching head into the soothing tingle of the force-field pillow, "Go now, Brodrig, 
and send in the doctor. He's the worst bumbler of the lot." 



5. THE WAR BEGINS 

From the radiating point of Siwenna, the forces of the Empire reached out cautiously into the 
black unknown of the Periphery. Giant ships passed the vast distances that separated the 
vagrant stars at the Galaxy's rim, and felt their way around the outermost edge of Foundation 
influence. 

Worlds isolated in their new barbarism of two centuries felt the sensation once again of Imperial 
overlords upon their soil. Allegiance was sworn in the face of the massive artillery covering 
capital cities. 

Garrisons were left; garrisons of men in Imperial uniform with the Spaceship-and-Sun insignia 
upon their shoulders. The old men took notice and remembered once again the forgotten tales 
of their grandfathers' fathers of the times when the universe was big, and rich, and peaceful 
and that same Spaceship-and-Sun ruled all. 

Then the great ships passed on to weave their line of forward bases further around the 
Foundation. And as each world was knotted into its proper place in the fabric, the report went 
back to Bel Riose at the General Fleadquarters he had established on the rocky barrenness of 
a wandering sunless planet. 

Now Riose relaxed and smiled grimly at Ducem Barr. "Well, what do you think, patrician?" 

"I? Of what value are my thoughts? I am not a military man." He took in with one wearily 
distasteful glance the crowded disorder of the rock-bound room which had been carved out of 
the wall of a cavern of artificial air, light, and heat which marked the single bubble of life in the 
vastness of a bleak world. 

"For the help I could give you," he muttered, "or would want to give you, you might return me to 
Siwenna." 

"Not yet. Not yet." The general turned his chair to the comer which held the huge, 
brilliantly-transparent sphere that mapped the old Imperial prefect of Anacreon and its 
neighboring sectors. "Later, when this is over, you will go back to your books and to more. I'll 
see to it that the estates of your family are restored to you and to your children for the rest of 
time." 

"Thank you," said Barr, with faint irony, "but I lack your faith in the happy outcome of all this." 

Riose laughed harshly, "Don't start your prophetic croakings again. This map speaks louder 
than all your woeful theories." He caressed its curved invisible outline gently. "Can you read a 
map in radial projection? You can? Well, here, see for yourself. The stars in gold represent the 
Imperial territories. The red stars are those in subjection to the Foundation and the pink are 
those which are probably within the economic sphere of influence. Now watch-" 

Riose's hand covered a rounded knob, and slowly an area of hard, white pinpoints changed into 
a deepening blue. Like an inverted cup they folded about the red and the pink. 

"Those blue stars have been taken over by my forces," said Riose with quiet satisfaction, "and 



they still advance. No opposition has appeared anywhere. The barbarians are quiet. And 
particularly, no opposition has come from Foundation forces. They sleep peacefully and well." 

"You spread your force thinly, don't you?" asked Barr. 

"As a matter of fact," said Riose, "despite appearances, I don't. The key points which I garrison 
and fortify are relatively few, but they are carefully chosen. The result is that the force 
expended is small, but the strategic result great. There are many advantages, more than would 
ever appear to anyone who hasn't made a careful study of spatial tactics, but it is apparent to 
anyone, for instance, that I can base an attack from any point in an inclosing sphere, and that 
when I am finished it will be impossible for the Foundation to attack at flank or rear. I shall have 
no flank or rear with respect to them. 

"This strategy of the Previous Enclosure has been tried before, notably in the campaigns of 
Loris VI, some two thousand years ago, but always imperfectly; always with the knowledge and 
attempted interference of the enemy. This is different." 

"The ideal textbook case?" Barr's voice was languid and indifferent. 

Riose was impatient, "You still think my forces will fail?" 

"They must." 

"You understand that there is no case in military history where an Enclosure has been 
completed that the attacking forces have not eventually won, except where an outside Navy 
exists in sufficient force to break the Enclosure." 

"If you say so." 

"And you still adhere to your faith." 

"Yes." 

Riose shrugged. "Then do so." 

Barr allowed the angry silence to continue for a moment, then asked quietly, "Flave you 
received an answer from the Emperor?" 

Riose removed a cigarette from a wall container behind his head, placed a filter tip between his 
lips and puffed it aflame carefully. Fie said, "You mean my request for reinforcements? It came, 
but that's all. Just the answer." 

"No ships." 

"None. I half-expected that. Frankly, patrician, I should never have allowed myself to be 
stampeded by your theories into requesting them in the first place. It puts me in a false light." 

"Does it?" 

"Definitely. Ships are at a premium. The civil wars of the last two centuries have smashed up 
more than half of the Grand Fleet and what's left is in pretty shaky condition. You know it isn't 
as if the ships we build these days are worth anything. I don't think there's a man in the Galaxy 



today who can build a first-rate hypernuclear motor." 

"I knew that," said the Siwennian. His eyes were thoughtful and introspective. "I didn't know that 
yoi/knew it. So his Imperial Majesty can spare no ships. Psychohistory could have predicted 
that; in fact, it probably did. I should say that Hari Seldon's dead hand wins the opening round." 

Riose answered sharply, "I have enough ships as it is. Your Seldon wins nothing. Should the 
situation turn more serious, then more ships will be available. As yet, the Emperor does not 
know all the story." 

"Indeed? What haven't you told him?" 

"Obviously - your theories." Riose looked sardonic. "The story is, with all respect to you, 
inherently improbable. If developments warrant; if events supply me with proof, then, but only 
then, would I make out the case of mortal danger. 

"And in addition," Riose drove on, casually, "the story, unbolstered by fact, has a flavor of lese 
majeste that could scarcely be pleasant to His Imperial Majesty." 

The old patrician smiled. "You mean that telling him his august throne is in danger of 
subversion by a parcel of ragged barbarians from the ends of the universe is not a warning to 
be believed or appreciated. Then you expect nothing from him." 

"Unless you count a special envoy as something." 

"And why a special envoy?" 

"It's an old custom. A direct representative of the crown is present on every military campaign 
which is under government auspices." 

"Really? Why?" 

"It's a method of preserving the symbol of personal Imperial leadership in all campaigns. It's 
gained a secondary function of insuring the fidelity of generals. It doesn't always succeed in 
that respect." 

"You'll find that inconvenient, general. Extraneous authority, I mean." 

"I don't doubt that," Riose reddened faintly, "but it can't be helped-" 

The receiver at the general's hand glowed warmly, and with an unobtrusive jar, the cylindered 
communication popped into its slot. Riose unrolled it, "Good! This is it!" 

Ducem Barr raised a mildly questioning eyebrow. 

Riose said, "You know we've captured one of these Trader people. Alive - and with his ship 
intact." 

"I've heard talk of it." 

"Well, they've just brought him in, and we'll have him here in a minute. You keep your seat, 
patrician. I want you here when I'm questioning him. It's why I asked you here today in the first 



place. You may understand him where I might miss important points." 

The door signal sounded and a touch of the general's toe swung the door wide. The man who 
stood on the threshold was tall and bearded, wore a short coat of a soft, leathery plastic, with 
an attached hood shoved back on his neck. His hands were free, and if he noticed the men 
about him were armed, he did not trouble to indicate it. 

He stepped in casually, and looked about with calculating eyes. He favored the general with a 
rudimentary wave of the hand and a half nod. 

"Your name?" demanded Riose, crisply. 

"Lathan Devers." The trader hooked his thumbs into his wide and gaudy belt. "Are you the boss 
here?" 

"You are a trader of the Foundation?" 

"That's right. Listen, if you're the boss, you'd better tell your hired men here to lay off my cargo." 

The general raised his head and regarded the prisoner coldly. "Answer questions. Do not 
volunteer orders." 

"All right. I'm agreeable. But one of your boys blasted a two-foot hole in his chest already, by 
sticking his fingers where he wasn't supposed to." 

Riose shifted his gaze to the lieutenant in charge. "Is this man telling the truth? Your report, 
Vrank, had it that no lives were lost." 

"None were, sir," the lieutenant spoke stiffly, apprehensively, "at the time. There was later some 
disposition to search the ship, there having arisen a rumor that a woman was aboard. Instead, 
sir, many instruments of unknown nature were located, instruments which the prisoner claims 
to be his stock in trade. One of them flashed on handling, and the soldier holding it died." 

The general turned back to the trader. "Does your ship carry nuclear explosives?" 

"Galaxy, no. What for? That fool grabbed a nuclear puncher, wrong end forward and set at 
maximum dispersion. You're not supposed to do that. Might as well point a neut-gun at your 
head. I'd have stopped him, if five men weren't sitting on my chest." 

Riose gestured at the waiting guard, "You go. The captured ship is to he sealed against all 
intrusion. Sit down, Devers." 

The trader did so, in the spot indicated, and withstood stolidly the hard scrutiny of the Imperial 
general and the curious glance of the Siwennian patrician. 

Riose said, "You're a sensible man, Devers." 

"Thank you. Are you impressed by my face, or do you want something? Tell you what, though. 
I'm a good business man." 

"It's about the same thing. You surrendered your ship when you might have decided to waste 
our ammunition and have yourself blown to electron-dust. It could result in good treatment for 



you, if you continue that sort of outlook on life." 

"Good treatment is what I mostly crave, boss." 

"Good, and co-operation is what I mostly crave." Riose smiled, and said in a low aside to 
Ducem Barr, "I hope the word 'crave' means what I think it does. Did you ever hear such a 
barbarous jargon?" 

Devers said blandly, "Right. I check you. But what kind of co-operation are you talking about, 
boss? To tell you straight, I don't know where I stand." He looked about him, "Where's this 
place, for instance, and - what's the idea?" 

"Ah, I've neglected the other half of the introductions. I apologize." Riose was in good humor. 
"That gentleman is Ducem Barr, Patrician of the Empire. I am Bel Riose, Peer of the Empire, 
and General of the Third Class in the armed forces of His Imperial Majesty." 

The trader's jaw slackened. Then, "The Empire? I mean the old Empire they taught us about at 
school? Huh! Funny! I always had the sort of notion that it didn't exist any more." 

"Look about you. It does," said Riose grimly. 

"Might have known it though," and Lathan Devers pointed his beard at the ceiling. "That was a 
mightily polished-looking set of craft that took my tub. No kingdom of the Periphery could have 
turned them out." His brow furrowed. "So what's the game, boss? Or do I call you general?" 

"Me game is war." 

"Empire versus Foundation, that it?" 

"Right." 

"Why?" 

"I think you know why." 

The trader stared sharply and shook his head. 

Riose let the other deliberate, then said softly, "I'm sure you know why." 

Lathan Devers muttered, "Warm here," and stood up to remove his hooded jacket. Then he sat 
down again and stretched his legs out before him. 

"You know," he said, comfortably, "I figure you're thinking I ought to jump up with a whoop and 
lay about me. I can catch you before you could move if I choose my time, and this old fellow 
who sits there and doesn't say anything couldn't do much to stop me." 

"But you won't," said Riose, confidently. 

"I won't," agreed Devers, amiably. "First off, killing you wouldn't stop the war, I suppose. There 
are more generals where you came from." 

"Very accurately calculated." 



"Besides which, I'd probably be slammed down about two seconds after I got you, and killed 
fast, or maybe slow, depending. But I'd be killed, and I never like to count on that when I'm 
making plans. It doesn't pay off." 

"I said you were a sensible man." 

"But there's one thing I would like, boss. I'd like you to tell me what you mean when you say I 
know why you're jumping us. I don't; and guessing games bother me no end." 

"Yes? Ever hear of Hari Seldon?" 

"No. I said I don't like guessing games." 

Riose flicked a side glance at Ducem Barr who smiled with a narrow gentleness and resumed 
his inwardly-dreaming expression. 

Riose said with a grimace, "Don't you play games, Devers. There is a tradition, or a fable, or 
sober history - I don't care what - upon your Foundation, that eventually you will found the 
Second Empire. I know quite a detailed version of Hari Seldon's psychohistorical claptrap, and 
your eventual plans of aggression against the Empire." 

"That so?" Devers nodded thoughtfully. "And who told you all that?" 

"Does that matter?" said Riose with dangerous smoothness. "You're here to question nothing. I 
want what you know about the Seldon Fable." 

"But if it's a Fable-" 

"Don't play with words, Devers." 

"I'm not. In fact, I'll give it to you straight. You know all I know about it. It's silly stuff, half-baked. 
Every world has its yams; you can't keep it away from them. Yes, I've heard that sort of talk; 
Seldon, Second Empire, and so on. They put kids to sleep at night with the stuff. The young 
squirts curl up in the spare rooms with their pocket projectors and suck up Seldon thrillers. But 
it's strictly non-adult. Nonintelligent adult, anyway." The trader shook his head. 

The Imperial general's eyes were dark. "Is that really so? You waste your lies, man. I've been 
on the planet, Terminus. I know your Foundation. I've looked it in the face." 

"And you ask me? Me, when I haven't kept foot on it for two months at a piece in ten years. You 
are wasting your time. But go ahead with your war, if it's fables you're after." 

And Barr spoke for the first time, mildly, "You are so confident then that the Foundation will 
win?" 

The trader turned. He flushed faintly and an old scar on one temple showed whitely, "Hm-m-m, 
the silent partner. How'd you squeeze that out of what I said, doc?" 

Riose nodded very slightly at Barr, and the Siwennian continued in a low voice, "Because the 
notion would bother you if you thought your world might lose this war, and suffer the bitter 
reapings of defeat, I know. My world once did, and still does." 



Lathan Devers fumbled his beard, looked from one of his opponents to the other, then laughed 
shortly. "Does he always talk like that, boss? Listen," he grew serious, "what's defeat? I've seen 
wars and I've seen defeats. What if the winner does take over? Who's bothered? Me? Guys like 
me?" He shook his head in derision. 

"Get this," the trader spoke forcefully and earnestly, "there are five or six fat slobs who usually 
run an average planet. They get the rabbit punch, but I'm not losing peace of mind over them. 
See. The people? The ordinary run of guys? Sure, some get killed, and the rest pay extra taxes 
for a while. But it settles itself out; it runs itself down. And then it's the old situation again with a 
different five or six." 

Ducem Barr's nostrils flared, and the tendons of his old right hand jerked; but he said nothing. 

Lathan Devers' eyes were on him. They missed nothing. He said, "Look. I spend my life in 
space for my five-and-dime gadgets and my beer-and-pretzel kickback from the Combines. 
There's fat fellows back there," his thumb jerked over his shoulder and back, "that sit home and 
collect my year's income every minute - out of skimmings from me and more like me. Suppose 
you run the Foundation. You'll still need us. You'll need us more than ever the Combines do - 
because you'd not know your way around, and we could bring in the hard cash. We'd make a 
better deal with the Empire. Yes, we would; and I'm a man of business. If it adds up to a plus 
mark, I'm for it." 

And he stared at the two with sardonic belligerence. 

The silence remained unbroken for minutes, and then a cylinder rattled into its slot. The general 
flipped it open, glanced at the neat printing and in-circuited the visuals with a sweep. 

"Prepare plan indicating position of each ship in action. Await orders on full-armed defensive." 

He reached for his cape. As he fastened it about his shoulders, he whispered in a stiff-lipped 
monotone to Barr, "I'm leaving this man to you. I'll expect results. This is war and I can be cruel 
to failures. Remember!" He left, with a salute to both. 

Lathan Devers looked after him, "Well, something's hit him where it hurts. What goes on?" 

"A battle, obviously," said Barr, gruffly. "The forces of the Foundation are coming out for their 
first battle. You'd better come along." 

There were armed soldiers in the room. Their bearing was respectful and their faces were hard. 
Devers followed the proud old Siwennian patriarch out of the room. 

The room to which they were led was smaller, barer. It contained two beds, a visi-screen, and 
shower and sanitary facilities. The soldiers marched out, and the thick door boomed hollowly 
shut. 

" Hmp ?' Devers stared disapprovingly about. "This looks permanent." 

"It is," said Barr, shortly. The old Siwennian turned his back. 

The trader said irritably, "What's your game, doc?" 



"I have no game. You're in my charge, that's all." 

The trader rose and advanced. His bulk towered over the unmoving patrician. "Yes? But you're 
in this cell with me and when you were marched here the guns were pointed just as hard at you 
as at me. Listen, you were all boiled up about my notions on the subject of war and peace." 

He waited fruitlessly, "All fight, let me ask you something. You said your country was licked 
once. By whom? Comet people from the outer nebulae?" 

Barr looked up. "By the Empire." 

"That so? Then what are you doing here?" 

Barr maintained an eloquent silence. 

The trader thrust out a lower lip and nodded his head slowly. He slipped off the flat-linked 
bracelet that hugged his fight wrist and held it out. "What do you think of that?" He wore the 
mate to it on his left. 

The Siwennian took the ornament. He responded slowly to the trader's gesture and put it on. 
The odd tingling at the wrist passed away quickly. 

Devers' voice changed at once. "Right, doc, you've got the action now. Just speak casually. If 
this room is wired, they won't get a thing. That's a Field Distorter you've got there; genuine 
Mallow design. Sells for twenty-five credits on any world from here to the outer rim. You get it 
free. Hold your lips still when you talk and take it easy. You've got to get the trick of it." 

Ducem Barr was suddenly weary. The trader's boring eyes were luminous and urging. He felt 
unequal to their demands. 

Barr said, "What do you want?" The words slurred from between unmoving lips. 

"I've told you. You make mouth noises like what we call a patriot. Yet your own world has been 
mashed up by the Empire, and here you are playing ball with the Empire's fair-haired general. 
Doesn't make sense, does it?" 

Barr said, "I have done my part. A conquering Imperial viceroy is dead because of me." 

"That so? Recently?" 

"Forty years ago." 

"Forty ... years ... ago!" The words seemed to have meaning to the trader. He frowned, "That's 
a long time to live on memories. Does that young squirt in the general's uniform know about it?" 

Barr nodded. 

Devers' eyes were dark with thought. "You want the Empire to win?" 

And the old Siwennian patrician broke out in sudden deep anger, "May the Empire and all its 
works perish in universal catastrophe. All Siwenna prays that daily. I had brothers once, a 
sister, a father. But I have children now, grandchildren. The general knows where to find them." 



Devers waited. 


Barr continued in a whisper, "But that would not stop me if the results in view warranted the 
risk. They would know how to die." 

The trader said gently, "You killed a viceroy once, huh? You know, I recognize a few things. We 
once had a mayor, Hober Mallow his name was. He visited Siwenna; that's your world, isn't it? 
He met a man named Barr." 

Ducem Barr stared hard, suspiciously. "What do you know of this?" 

"What every trader on the Foundation knows. You might be a smart old fellow put in here to get 
on my right side. Sure, they'd point guns at you, and you'd hate the Empire and be all-out for its 
smashing. Then I'd fall all over you and pour out my heart to you, and wouldn't the general be 
pleased. There's not much chance of that, doc. 

"But just the same I'd like to have you prove that you're the son of Onum Barr of Siwenna - the 
sixth and youngest who escaped the massacre." 

Ducem Barr's hand shook as he opened the flat metal box in a wall recess. The metal object he 
withdrew clanked softly as he thrust it into the trader's hands. "Look at that," he said. 

Devers stared. He held the swollen central link of the chain close to his eyes and swore softly. 
"That's Mallow's monogram, or I'm a space-struck rookie, and the design is fifty years old if it's 
a day." 

He looked up and smiled. 

"Shake, doc. A man-sized nuclear shield is all the proof I need," and he held out his large hand. 


6. THE FAVORITE 

The tiny ships had appeared out of the vacant depths and darted into the midst of the Armada. 
Without a shot or a burst of energy, they weaved through the ship-swollen area, then blasted 
on and out, while the Imperial wagons turned after them like lumbering beasts. There were two 
noiseless flares that pinpointed space as two of the tiny gnats shriveled in atomic disintegration, 
and the rest were gone. 

The great ships searched, then returned to their original task, and world by world, the great web 
of the Enclosure continued. 

Brodrig's uniform was stately; carefully tailored and as carefully worn. His walk through the 
gardens of the obscure planet Wanda, now temporary Imperial headquarters, was leisurely; his 
expression was somber. 

Bel Riose walked with him, his field uniform open at the collar, and doleful in its monotonous 
gray-black. 

Riose indicated the smooth black bench under the fragrant tree-fern whose large spatulate 



leaves lifted flatly against the white sun. "See that, sir. It is a relic of the Imperium. The 
ornamented benches, built for lovers, linger on, fresh and useful, while the factories and the 
palaces collapse into unremembered ruin." 

He seated himself, while Cleon ll's Privy Secretary stood erect before him and clipped the 
leaves above neatly with precise swings of his ivory staff. 

Riose crossed his legs and offered a cigarette to the other. He fingered one himself as he 
spoke, "It is what one would expect from the enlightened wisdom of His Imperial Majesty to 
send so competent an observer as yourself. It relieves any anxiety I might have felt that the 
press of more important and more immediate business might perhaps force into the shadows a 
small campaign on the Periphery." 

"The eyes of the Emperor are everywhere," said Brodrig, mechanically. "We do not 
underestimate the importance of the campaign; yet still it would seem that too great an 
emphasis is being placed upon its difficulty. Surely their little ships are no such barrier that we 
must move through the intricate preliminary maneuver of an Enclosure." 

Riose flushed, but he maintained his equilibrium. "I can not risk the lives of my men, who are 
few enough, or the destruction of my ships which are irreplaceable, by a too-rash attack. The 
establishment of an Enclosure will quarter my casualties in the ultimate attack, howsoever 
difficult it be. The military reasons for that I took the liberty to explain yesterday." 

"Well, well, I am not a military man. In this case, you assure me that what seems patently and 
obviously right is, in reality, wrong. We will allow that. Yet your caution shoots far beyond that. 
In your second communication, you requested reinforcements. And these, against an enemy 
poor, small, and barbarous, with whom you have had not one' skirmish at the time. To desire 
more forces under the circumstances would savor almost of incapacity or worse, had not your 
earlier career given sufficient proof of your boldness and imagination." 

"I thank you," said the general, coldly, "but I would remind you that there is a difference 
between boldness and blindness. There is a place for a decisive gamble when you know your 
enemy and can calculate the risks at least roughly; but to move at all against an unknown 
enemy is boldness in itself. You might as well ask why the same man sprints safely across an 
obstacle course in the day, and falls over the furniture in his room at night." 

Brodrig swept away the other's words with a neat flirt of the fingers. "Dramatic, but not 
satisfactory. You have been to this barbarian world yourself. You have in addition this enemy 
prisoner you coddle, this trader. Between yourself and the prisoner you are not in a night fog." 

"No? I pray you to remember that a world which has developed in isolation for two centuries 
can not be interpreted to the point of intelligent attack by a month's visit. I am a soldier, not a 
cleft-chinned, barrel-chested hero of a subetheric trimensional thriller. Nor can a single 
prisoner, and one who is an obscure member of an economic group which has no close 
connection with the enemy world introduce me to all the inner secrets of enemy strategy." 

"You have questioned him?" 

"I have." 



Well? 


"It has been useful, but not vitally so. His ship is tiny, of no account. He sells little toys which 
are amusing if nothing else. I have a few of the cleverest which I intend sending to the Emperor 
as curiosities. Naturally, there is a good deal about the ship and its workings which I do not 
understand, but then I am not a tech-man." 

"But you have among you those who are," pointed out Brodrig. 

"I, too, am aware of that," replied the general in faintly caustic tones. "But the fools have far to 
go before they could meet my needs. I have already sent for clever men who can understand 
the workings of the odd nuclear field-circuits the ship contains. I have received no answer." 

"Men of that type can not be spared, general. Surely, there must be one man of your vast 
province who understands nucleics." 

"Were there such a one, I would have him heal the limping, invalid motors that power two of my 
small fleet of ships. Two ships of my meager ten that can not fight a major battle for lack of 
sufficient power supply. One fifth of my force condemned to the carrion activity of consolidating 
positions behind the lines." 

The secretary's fingers fluttered impatiently. "Your position is not unique in that respect, 
general. The Emperor has similar troubles." 

The general threw away his shredded, never-lit cigarette, lit another, and shrugged. "Well, it is 
beside the immediate point, this lack of first-class tech-men. Except that I might have made 
more progress with my prisoner were my Psychic Probe in proper order." 

The secretary's eyebrows lifted. "You have a Probe?" 

"An old one. A superannuated one which fails me the one time I needed it. I set it up during the 
prisoner's sleep, and received nothing. So much for the Probe. I have tried it on my own men 
and the reaction is quite proper, but again there is not one among my staff of tech-men who 
can tell me why it fails upon the prisoner. Ducem Barr, who is a theoretician of parts, though no 
mechanic, says the psychic structure of the prisoner may be unaffected by the Probe since 
from childhood he has been subjected to alien environments and neural stimuli. I don't know. 
But he may yet be useful. I save him in that hope." 

Brodrig leaned on his staff. A shall see if a specialist is available in the capital. In the 
meanwhile, what of this other man you just mentioned, this Siwennian? You keep too many 
enemies in your good graces." 

"He knows the enemy. He, too, I keep for future reference and the help he may afford me." 

"But he is a Siwennian and the son of a proscribed rebel." 

"He is old and powerless, and his family acts as hostage." 

"I see. Yet I think that I should speak to this trader, myself." 

"Certainly." 



"Alone," the secretary added coldly, making his point. 

"Certainly," repeated Riose, blandly. "As a loyal subject of the Emperor, I accept his personal 
representative as my superior. However, since the trader is at the permanent base, you will 
have to leave the front areas at an interesting moment." 

"Yes? Interesting in what way?" 

"Interesting in that the Enclosure is complete today. Interesting in that within the week, the 
Twentieth Fleet of the Border advances inward towards the core of resistance." Riose smiled 
and turned away. 

In a vague way, Brodrig felt punctured. 


7. BRIBERY 


Sergeant Mori Luk made an ideal soldier of the ranks. He came from the huge agricultural 
planets of the Pleiades where only army life could break the bond to the soil and the unavailing 
life of drudgery; and he was typical of that background. Unimaginative enough to face danger 
without fear, he was strong and agile enough to face it successfully. He accepted orders 
instantly, drove the men under him unbendingly and adored his general unswervingly. 

And yet with that, he was of a sunny nature. If he killed a man in the line of duty without a scrap 
of hesitation, it was also without a scrap of animosity. 

That Sergeant Luk should signal at the door before entering was further a sign of tact, for he 
would have been perfectly within his rights to enter without signaling. 

The two within looked up from their evening meal and one reached out with his foot to cut off 
the cracked voice which rattled out of the battered pocket-transmitter with bright liveliness. 

"More books?" asked Lathan Devers. 

The sergeant held out the tightly-wound cylinder of film and scratched his neck. "It belongs to 
Engineer Orre, but he'll have to have it back. He's going to send it to his kids, you know, like 
what you might call a souvenir, you know." 

Ducem Barr turned the cylinder in his hands with interest. "And where did the engineer get it? 
He hasn't a transmitter also, has he?" 

The sergeant shook his head emphatically. He pointed to the knocked-about remnant at the 
foot of the bed. "That's the only one in the place. This fellow, Orre, now, he got that book from 
one of these pig-pen worlds out here we captured. They had it in a big building by itself and he 
had to kill a few of the natives that tried to stop him from taking it." 

He looked at it appraisingly. "It makes a good souvenir - for kids." 

He paused, then said stealthily, "There's big news floating about, by the way. It's only 
scuttlebutt, but even so, it's too good to keep. The general did it again." And he nodded slowly, 



gravely. 

"That so?" said Devers. "And what did he do?" 

"Finished the Enclosure, that's all." The sergeant chuckled with a fatherly pride. "Isn't he the 
corker, though? Didn't he work it fine? One of the fellows who's strong on fancy talk, says it 
went as smooth and even as the music of the spheres, whatever they are." 

"The big offensive starts now?" asked Barr, mildly. 

"Hope so," was the boisterous response. "I want to get back on my ship now that my arm is in 
one piece again. I'm tired of sitting on my scupper out here." 

"So am I," muttered Devers, suddenly and savagely. There was a bit of underlip caught in his 
teeth, and he worried it. 

The sergeant looked at him doubtfully, and said, "I'd better go now. The captain's round is due 
and I'd just as soon he didn't catch me in here." 

He paused at the door. "By the way, sir," he said with sudden, awkward shyness to the trader, 

"I heard from my wife. She says that little freezer you gave me to send her works fine. It doesn't 
cost her anything, and she just about keeps a month's supply of food froze up complete. I 
appreciate it." 

"It's all right. Forget it." 

The great door moved noiselessly shut behind the grinning sergeant. 

Ducem Barr got out of his chair. "Well, he gives us a fair return for the freezer. Let's take a look 
at this new book. Ahh, the title is gone." 

He unrolled a yard or so of the film and looked through at the light. Then he murmured, "Well, 
skewer me through the scupper, as the sergeant says. This is 'The Garden of Summa,' 

Devers." 

"That so?" said the trader, without interest. He shoved aside what was left of his dinner. "Sit 
down, Barr. Listening to this old-time literature isn't doing me any good. You heard what the 
sergeant said?" 

"Yes, I did. What of it?" 

"The offensive will start. And we sit here!" 

"Where do you want to sit?" 

"You know what I mean. There's no use just waiting." 

"Isn't there?" Barr was carefully removing the old film from the transmitter and installing the 
new. "You told me a good deal of Foundation history in the last month, and it seems that the 
great leaders of past crises did precious little more than sit - and wait." 

"Ah, Barr, but they knew where they were going." 



"Did they? I suppose they said they did when it was over, and for all I know maybe they did. But 
there's no proof that things would not have worked out as well or better if they had not known 
where they were going. The deeper economic and sociological forces aren't directed by 
individual men." 

Devers sneered. "No way of telling that things wouldn't have worked out worse, either. You're 
arguing tail-end backwards." His eyes were brooding. "You know, suppose I blasted him?" 

"Whom? Riose?" 

"Yes." 

Barr sighed. His aging eyes were troubled with a reflection of the long past. "Assassination isn't 
the way out, Devers. I once tried it, under provocation, when I was twenty - but it solved 
nothing. I removed a villain from Siwenna, but not the Imperial yoke; and it was the Imperial 
yoke and not the villain that mattered." 

"But Riose is not just a villain, doc. He's the whole blamed army. It would fall apart without him. 
They hang on him like babies. The sergeant out there slobbers every time he mentions him." 

"Even so. There are other armies and other leaders. You must go deeper. There is this Brodrig, 
for instance - no one more than he has the ear of the Emperor. He could demand hundreds of 
ships where Riose must struggle with ten. I know him by reputation." 

"That so? What about him?" The trader's eyes lost in frustration what they gained in sharp 
interest. 

"You want a pocket outline? He's a low-born rascal who has by unfailing flattery tickled the 
whims of the Emperor. He's well-hated by the court aristocracy, vermin themselves, because 
he can lay claim to neither family nor humility. He is the Emperor's adviser in all things, and the 
Emperor's too in the worst things. He is faithless by choice but loyal by necessity. There is not a 
man in the Empire as subtle in villainy or as crude in his pleasures. And they say there is no 
way to the Emperor's favor but through him; and no way to his, but through infamy." 

"Wow!" Devers pulled thoughtfully at his neatly trimmed beard. "And he's the old boy the 
Emperor sent out here to keep an eye on Riose. Do you know I have an idea?" 

"I do now." 

"Suppose this Brodrig takes a dislike to our young Army's Delight?" 

"He probably has already. He's not noted for a capacity for liking." 

"Suppose it gets really bad. The Emperor might hear about it, and Riose might be in trouble." 
"Uh-huh. Quite likely. But how do you propose to get that to happen?" 

"I don't know. I suppose he could be bribed?" 

The patrician laughed gently. "Yes, in a way, but not in the manner you bribed the sergeant - 
not with a pocket freezer. And even if you reach his scale, it wouldn't be worth it. There's 
probably no one so easily bribed, but he lacks even the fundamental honesty of honorable 



corruption. He doesn't stay bribed; not for any sum. Think of something else." 

Devers swung a leg over his knee and his toe nodded quickly and restlessly. "It's the first hint, 
though-" 

He stopped; the door signal was flashing once again, and the sergeant was on the threshold 
once more. He was excited, and his broad face was red and unsmiling. 

"Sir," he began, in an agitated attempt at deference, "I am very thankful for the freezer, and you 
have always spoken to me very fine, although I am only the son of a farmer and you are great 
lords." 

His Pleiades accent had grown thick, almost too much so for easy comprehension; and with 
excitement, his lumpish peasant derivation wiped out completely the soldierly bearing so long 
and so painfully cultivated. 

Barr said softly, "What is it, sergeant?" 

"Lord Brodrig is coming to see you. Tomorrow! I know, because the captain told me to have my 
men ready for dress review tomorrow for ... for him. I thought - I might warn you." 

Barr said, "Thank you, sergeant, we appreciate that. But it's all right, man; no need for-" 

But the look on Sergeant Luk's face was now unmistakably one of fear. He spoke in a rough 
whisper, "You don't hear the stories the men tell about him. He has sold himself to the space 
fiend. No, don't laugh. There are most terrible tales told about him. They say he has men with 
blast-guns who follow him everywhere, and when he wants pleasure, he just tells them to blast 
down anyone they meet. And they do - and he laughs. They say even the Emperor is in terror 
of him, and that he forces the Emperor to raise taxes and won't let him listen to the complaints 
of the people. 

"And he hates the general, that's what they say. They say he would like to kill the general, 
because the general is so great and wise. But he can't because our general is a match for 
anyone and he knows Lord Brodrig is a bad 'un." 

The sergeant blinked; smiled in a sudden incongruous shyness at his own outburst; and 
backed toward the door. He nodded his head, jerkily. "You mind my words. Watch him." 

He ducked out. 

And Devers looked up, hard-eyed. "This breaks things our way, doesn't it, doc?" 

"It depends," said Barr, dryly, "on Brodrig, doesn't it?" 

But Devers was thinking, not listening. 

He was thinking hard. 

Lord Brodrig ducked his head as he stepped into the cramped living quarters of the trading 
ship, and his two armed guards followed quickly, with bared guns and the professionally hard 
scowls of the hired bravos. 



The Privy Secretary had little of the look of the lost soul about him just then. If the space fiend 
had bought him, he had left no visible mark of possession. Rather might Brodrig have been 
considered a breath of court-fashion come to enliven the hard, bare ugliness of an army base. 

The stiff, tight lines of his sheened and immaculate costume gave him the illusion of height, 
from the very top of which his cold, emotionless eyes stared down the declivity of a long nose 
at the trader. The mother-of-pearl ruches at his wrists fluttered filmily as he brought his ivory 
stick to the ground before him and leaned upon it daintily. 

"No," he said, with a little gesture, "you remain here. Forget your toys; I am not interested in 
them." 

He drew forth a chair, dusted it carefully with the iridescent square of fabric attached to the top 
of his white stick, and seated himself. Devers glanced towards the mate to the chair, but 
Brodrig said lazily, "You will stand in the presence of a Peer of the Realm." 

He smiled. 

Devers shrugged. "If you're not interested in my stock in trade, what am I here for?" 

The Privy Secretary waited coldly, and Devers added a slow, "Sir." 

"For privacy," said the secretary. "Now is it likely that I would come two hundred parsecs 
through space to inspect trinkets? It's you I want to see." He extracted a small pink tablet from 
an engraved box and placed it delicately between his teeth. He sucked it slowly and 
appreciatively. 

"For instance," he said, "who are you? Are you really a citizen of this barbarian world that is 
creating all this fury of military frenzy?" 

Devers nodded gravely. 

"And you were really captured by him after the beginning of this squabble he calls a war. I am 
referring to our young general." 

Devers nodded again. 

"So! Very well, my worthy Outlander. I see your fluency of speech is at a minimum. I shall 
smooth the way for you. It seems that our general here is fighting an apparently meaningless 
war with frightful transports of energy - and this over a forsaken fleabite of a world at the end of 
nowhere, which to a logical man would not seem worth a single blast of a single gun. Yet the 
general is not illogical. On the contrary, I would say he was extremely intelligent. Do you follow 
me?" 

"Can't say I do, sir." 

The secretary inspected his fingernails and said, "Listen further, then. The general would not 
waste his men and ships on a sterile feat of glory. I know he talks of glory and of Imperial 
honor, but it is quite obvious that the affectation of being one of the insufferable old demigods 
of the Heroic Age won't wash. There is something more than glory hereand he does take queer, 
unnecessary care of you. Now if you were my prisoner and told me as little of use as you have 



our general, I would slit open your abdomen and strangle you with your own intestines." 

Devers remained wooden. His eyes moved slightly, first to one of the secretary's bully-boys, 
and then to the other. They were ready; eagerly ready. 

The secretary smiled. "Well, now, you're a silent devil. According to the general, even a Psychic 
Probe made no impression, and that was a mistake on his part, by the way, for it convinced me 
that our young military whizz-bang was lying." He seemed in high humor. 

"My honest tradesman," he said, "I have a Psychic Probe of my own, one that ought to suit you 
peculiarly well. You see this-" 

And between thumb and forefinger, held negligently, were intricately designed, pink-and-yellow 
rectangles which were most definitely obvious in identity. 

Devers said so. "It looks like cash," he said. 

"Cash it is - and the best cash of the Empire, for it is backed by my estates, which are more 
extensive than the Emperor's own. A hundred thousand credits. All here! Between two fingers! 
Yours!" 

"For what, sir? I am a good trader, but all trades go in both directions." 

"For what? For the truth! What is the general after? Why is he fighting this war?" 

Lathan Devers sighed, and smoothed his beard thoughtfully. 

"What he's after?" His eyes were following the motions of the secretary's hands as he counted 
the money slowly, bill by bill. "In a word, the Empire." 

"Hmp. How ordinary! It always comes to that in the end. But how? What is the road that leads 
from the Galaxy's edge to the peak of Empire so broadly and invitingly?" 

"The Foundation," said Devers, bitterly, "has secrets. They have books, old books - so old that 
the language they are in is only known to a few of the top men. But the secrets are shrouded in 
ritual and religion, and none may use them. I tried and now I am here - and there is a death 
sentence waiting for me, there." 

"I see. And these old secrets? Come, for one hundred thousand I deserve the intimate details." 
"The transmutation of elements," said Devers, shortly. 

The secretary's eyes narrowed and lost some of their detachment. "I have been told that 
practical transmutation is impossible by the laws of nucleics." 

"So it is, if nuclear forces are used. But the ancients were smart boys. There are sources of 
power greater than the nuclei and more fundamental. If the Foundation used those sources as I 
suggested-" 

Devers felt a soft, creeping sensation in his stomach. The bait was dangling; the fish was 
nosing it. 



The secretary said suddenly, "Continue. The general, I am sure, is aware of a this. But what 
does he intend doing once he finishes this opera-bouffe affair?" 

Devers kept his voice rock-steady. "With transmutation he controls the economy of the whole 
set-up of your Empire. Mineral holdings won't be worth a sneeze when Riose can make 
tungsten out of aluminum and iridium out of iron. An entire production system based on the 
scarcity of certain elements and the abundance of others is thrown completely out of whack. 
There'll be the greatest disjointment the Empire has ever seen, and only Riose will be able to 
stop it. Anc/ there is the question of this new power I mentioned, the use of which won't give 
Riose religious heebies. 

"There's nothing that can stop him now. He's got the Foundation by the back of the neck, and 
once he's finished with it, he'll be Emperor in two years." 

"So." Brodrig laughed lightly. "Iridium out of iron, that's what you said, isn't it? Come, I'll tell you 
a state secret. Do you know that the Foundation has already been in communication with the 
general?" 

Devers' back stiffened. 

"You look surprised. Why not? It seems logical now. They offered him a hundred tons of iridium 
a year to make peace. A hundred tons of iron converted to iridium in violation of their religious 
principles to save their necks. Fair enough, but no wonder our rigidly incorruptible general 
refused - when he can have the iridium and the Empire as well. And poor Cleon called him his 
one honest general. My bewhiskered merchant, you have earned your money." 

He tossed it, and Devers scrambled after the flying bills. 

Lord Brodrig stopped at the door and turned. "One reminder, trader. My playmates with the 
guns here have neither middle ears, tongues, education, nor intelligence. They can neither 
hear, speak, write, nor even make sense to a Psychic Probe. But they are very expert at 
interesting executions. I have bought you, man, at one hundred thousand credits. You will be 
good and worthy merchandise. Should you forget that you are bought at any time and attempt 
to ... say ... repeat our conversation to Riose, you will be executed. But executed my way." 

And in that delicate face there were sudden hard lines of eager cruelty that changed the studied 
smile into a red-lipped snarl. For one fleeting second, Devers saw that space fiend who had 
bought his buyer, look out of his buyer's eyes. 

Silently, he preceded the two thrusting blast-guns of Brodrig's "playmates" to his quarters. 

And to Ducem Barr's question, he said with brooding satisfaction, "No, that's the queerest part 
of it. He bribed me. 

Two months of difficult war had left their mark on Bel Riose. There was heavy-handed gravity 
about him; and he was short-tempered. 

It was with impatience that he addressed the worshiping Sergeant Luk. "Wait outside, soldier, 
and conduct these men back to their quarters when I am through. No one is to enter until I call. 
No one at all, you understand." 



The sergeant saluted himself stiffly out of the room, and Riose with muttered disgust scooped 
up the waiting papers on his desk, threw them into the top drawer and slammed it shut. 

"Take seats," he said shortly, to the waiting two. "I haven't much time. Strictly speaking, I 
shouldn't be here at all, but it is necessary to see you." 

He turned to Ducem Barr, whose long fingers were caressing with interest the crystal cube in 
which was set the simulacrum of the lined, austere face of His Imperial Majesty, Cleon II. 

"In the first place, patrician," said the general, "your Seldon is losing. To be sure, he battles 
well, for these men of the Foundation swarm like senseless bees and fight like madmen. Every 
planet is defended viciously, and once taken, every planet heaves so with rebellion it is as 
much trouble to hold as to conquer. But they are taken, and they are held. Your Seldon is 
losing." 

"But he has not yet lost," murmured Barr politely. 

"The Foundation itself retains less optimism. They offer me millions in order that I may not put 
this Seldon to the final test." 

"So rumor goes." 

"Ah, is rumor preceding me? Does it prate also of the latest?" 

"What is the latest?" 

"Why, that Lord Brodrig, the darling of the Emperor, is now second in command at his own 
request." 

Devers spoke for the first time. "At his own request, boss? How come? Or are you growing to 
like the fellow?" He chuckled. 

Riose said, calmly, "No, can't say I do. It's just that he bought the office at what I considered a 
fair and adequate price." 

"Such as?" 

"Such as a request to the Emperor for reinforcements." 

Devers' contemptuous smile broadened. "'He has communicated with the Emperor, huh? And I 
take it, boss, you're just waiting for these reinforcements, but they'll come any day. Right?" 

"Wrong! They have already come. Five ships of the line; smooth and strong, with a personal 
message of congratulations from the Emperor, and more ships on the way. What's wrong, 
trader?" he asked, sardonically. 

Devers spoke through suddenly frozen lips. "Nothing!" 

Riose strode out from behind his desk and faced the trader, hand on the butt of his blast-gun. 

"I say, what's wrong, trader? The news would seem to disturb you. Surely, you have no sudden 
birth of interest in the Foundation." 



"I haven't." 

"Yes - there are queer points about you." 

"That so, boss?" Devers smiled tightly, and balled the fists in his pockets. "Just you line them 
up and I'll knock them down for you." 

"Here they are. You were caught easily. You surrendered at first blow with a burnt-out shield. 
You're quite ready to desert your world, and that without a price. Interesting, all this, isn't it?" 

"I crave to be on the winning side, boss. I'm a sensible man; you called me that yourself." 

Riose said with tight throatiness, "Granted! Yet no trader since has been captured. No trade 
ship but has had the speed to escape at choice. No trade ship but has had a screen that could 
take all the beating a light cruiser could give it, should it choose to fight. And no trader but has 
fought to death when occasion warranted. Traders have been traced as the leaders and 
instigators of the guerilla warfare on occupied planets and of the flying raids in occupied space. 

"Are you the only sensible man then? You neither fight nor flee, but turn traitor without urging. 
You are unique, amazingly unique - in fact, suspiciously unique." 

Devers said softly, "I take your meaning, but you have nothing on me. I've been here now six 
months, and I've been a good boy." 

"So you have, and I have repaid you by good treatment. I have left your ship undisturbed and 
treated you with every consideration. Yet you fall short. Freely offered information, for instance, 
on your gadgets might have been helpful. The atomic principles on which they are built would 
seem to be used in some of the Foundation's nastiest weapons. Right?" 

"I am only a trader," said Devers, "and not one of these bigwig technicians. I sell the stuff; I 
don't make it." 

"Well, that will be seen shortly. It is what I came here for. For instance, your ship will be 
searched for a personal force-shield. You have never worn one; yet all soldiers of the 
Foundation do. It will be significant evidence that there is information you do not choose to give 
me. Right?" 

There was no answer. He continued, "And there will be more direct evidence. I have brought 
with me the Psychic Probe. It failed once before, but contact with the enemy is a liberal 
education." 

His voice was smoothly threatening and Devers felt the gun thrust hard in his midriff - the 
general's gun, hitherto in its holster. 

The general said quietly, "You will remove your wristband and any other metal ornament you 
wear and give them to me. Slowly! Atomic fields can be distorted, you see, and Psychic Probes 
might probe only into static. That's right.. I'll take it." 

The receiver on the general's desk was glowing and a message capsule clicked into the slot, 
near which Barr stood and still held the trimensional Imperial bust. 



Riose stepped behind his desk, with his blast-gun held ready. He said to Barr, "You too, 
patrician. Your wristband condemns you. You have been helpful earlier, however, and I am not 
vindictive, but I shall judge the fate of your behostaged family by the results of the Psychic 
Probe." 

And as Riose leaned over to take out the message capsule, Barr lifted the crystal-enveloped 
bust of Cleon and quietly and methodically brought it down upon the general's head. 

It happened too suddenly for Devers to grasp. It was as if a sudden demon had grown into the 
old man. 

"Out!" said Barr, in a tooth-clenched whisper. "Quickly!" He seized Riose's dropped blaster and 
buried it in his blouse. 

Sergeant Luk turned as they emerged from the narrowest possible crack of the door. 

Barr said easily, "Lead on, sergeant!" 

Devers closed the door behind him. 

Sergeant Luk led in silence to their quarters, and then, with the briefest pause, continued 
onward, for there was the nudge of a blast-gun muzzle in his ribs, and a hard voice in his ears 
which said, "To the trade ship." 

Devers stepped forward to open the air lock, and Barr said, "Stand where you are, Luk. You've 
been a decent man, and we're not going to kill you." 

But the sergeant recognized the monogram on the gun. He cried in choked fury, "You've killed 
the general." 

With a wild, incoherent yell, he charged blindly upon the blasting fury of the gun and collapsed 
in blasted ruin. 

The trade ship was rising above the dead planet before the signal lights began their eerie blink 
and against the creamy cobweb of the great Lens in the sky which was the Galaxy, other black 
forms rose. 

Devers said grimly, "Hold tight, Barr - and let's see if they've got a ship that can match my 
speed." 

He knew they hadn't! 

And once in open space, the trader's voice seemed lost and dead as he said, "The line I fed 
Brodrig was a little too good. It seems as if he's thrown in with the general." 

Swiftly they raced into the depths of the star-mass that was the Galaxy. 



8. TO TRANTOR 

Devers bent over the little dead globe, watching for a tiny sign of life. The directional control 
was slowly and thoroughly sieving space with its jabbing tight sheaf of signals. 

Barr watched patiently from his seat on the low cot in the comer, He asked, "No more signs of 
them?" 

"The Empire boys? No." The trader growled the words with evident impatience. "We lost the 
scuppers long ago. Space! With the blind jumps we took through hyperspace, it's lucky we 
didn't land up in a sun's belly. They couldn't have followed us even if they outranqed us, which 
they didn't." 

He sat back and loosened his collar with a jerk. "I don't know what those Empire boys have 
done here. I think some of the gaps are out of alignment." 

"I take it, then, you're trying to get to the Foundation." 

"I'm calling the Association - or trying to." 

"The Association? Who are they?" 

"Association of Independent Traders. Never heard of it, huh? Well, you're not alone. We haven't 
made our splash yet!" 

For a while there was a silence that centered about the unresponsive Reception Indicator, and 
Barr said, "Are you within range?" 

"I don't know. I haven't but a small notion where we are, going by dead reckoning. That's why I 
have to use directional control. It could take years, you know." 

"Might it?" 

Barr pointed; and Devers jumped and adjusted his earphones. Within the little murky sphere 
there was a tiny glowing whiteness. 

For half an hour, Devers nursed the fragile, groping thread of communication that reached 
through hyperspace to connect two points that laggard light would take five hundred years to 
bind together. 

Then he sat back, hopelessly. He looked up, and shoved the earphones back. 

"Let's eat, doc. There's a needle-shower you can use if you want to, but go easy on the hot 
water." 

He squatted before one of the cabinets that lined one wall and felt through the contents. "You're 
not a vegetarian, I hope?" 

Barr said, "I'm omnivorous. But what about the Association. Have you lost them?" 

"Looks so. It was extreme range, a little too extreme. Doesn't matter, though. I got all that 
counted." 



He straightened, and placed the two metal containers upon the table. "Just give it five minutes, 
doc, then slit it open by pushing the contact. It'll be plate, food, and fork - sort of handy for 
when you're in a hurry, if you're not interested in such incidentals as napkins. I suppose you 
want to know what I got out of the Association." 

"If it isn't a secret." 

Devers shook his head. "Not to you. What Riose said was true." 

"About the offer of tribute?" 

"Uh-huh. They offered it, and had it refused. Things are bad. There's fighting in the outer suns 
of Loris." 

"Loris is close to the Foundation?" 

"Huh? Oh, you wouldn't know. It's one of the original Four Kingdoms. You might call it part of 
the inner line of defense. That's not the worst. They've been fighting large ships previously 
never encountered. Which means Riose wasn't giving us the works. He has received more 
ships. Brodrig has switched sides, and I have messed things up." 

His eyes were bleak as he joined the food-container contact-points and watched it fall open 
neatly. The stewlike dish steamed its aroma through the room. Ducem Barr was already eating. 

"So much," said Barr, "for improvisations, then. We can do nothing here; we can not cut 
through the Imperial lines to return to the Foundation; we can do nothing but that which is most 
sensible - to wait patiently. However, if Riose has reached the inner line I trust the wait will not 
be too long." 

And Devers put down his fork. "Wait, is it?" he snarled, glowering. "That's all right for you. 
You've got nothing at stake." 

"Haven't I?" Barr smiled thinly. 

"No. In fact, I'll tell you." Devers' irritation skimmed the surface. "I'm tired of looking at this whole 
business as if it were an interesting something-or-other on a microscope slide. I've got friends 
somewhere out there, dying; and a whole world out there, my home, dying also. You're an 
outsider. You don't know." 

"I have seen friends die." The old man's hands were limp in his lap and his eyes were closed. 
"Are you married?" 

Devers said, "Traders don't marry." 

"Well, I have two sons and a nephew. They have been warned, but - for reasons - they could 
take no action. Our escape means their death. My daughter and my two grandchildren have, I 
hope, left the planet safety before this, but even excluding them, I have already risked and lost 
more than you." 

Devers was morosely savage. "I know. But that was a matter of choice. You might have played 
ball with Riose. I never asked you to-" 



Barr shook his head. "It was not a matter of choice, Devers. Make your conscience free, I didn't 
risk my sons for you. I co-operated with Riose as long as I dared. But there was the Psychic 
Probe." 

The Siwennian patrician opened his eyes and they were sharp with pain. "Riose came to me 
once; it was over a year ago. He spoke of a cult centering about the magicians, but missed the 
truth. It is not quite a cult. You see, it is forty years now that Siwenna has been gripped in the 
same unbearable vise that threatens your world. Five revolts have been ground out. Then I 
discovered the ancient records of Hari Seldon - and now this 'cult' waits. 

"It waits for the coming of the 'magicians' and for that day it is ready. My sons are leaders of 
those who wait. It is that secret which is in my mind and which the Probe must never touch. 

And so they must die as hostages; for the alternative is their death as rebels and half of 
Siwenna with them. You see, I had no choice! And I am no outsider." 

Devers' eyes fell, and Barr continued softly, "It is on a Foundation victory that Siwenna's hopes 
depend. It is for a Foundation victory that my sons are sacrificed. And Hari Seldon does not 
pre-calculate the inevitable salvation of Siwenna as he does that of the Foundation. I have no 
certainty for my people - only hope." 

"But you are still satisfied to wait. Even with the Imperial Navy at Loris." 

"I would wait, in perfect confidence," said Barr, simply, "if they had landed on the planet, 
Terminus, itself." 

The trader frowned hopelessly. "I don't know. It can't really work like that; not just like magic. 
Psychohistory or not, they're terribly strong, and we're weak. What can Setdon do about it?" 

"There's nothing to do. It's all already done. It's proceeding now. Because you don't hear the 
wheels turning and the gongs beating doesn't mean it's any the less certain." 

"Maybe; but I wish you had cracked Riose's skull for keeps. He's more the enemy than all his 
army." 

"Cracked his skull? With Brodrig his second in command?" Barr's face sharpened with hate. "All 
Siwenna would have been my hostage. Brodrig has proven his worth long since. There exists a 
world which five years ago lost one male in every ten - and simply for failure to meet 
outstanding taxes. This same Brodrig was the tax-collector. No, Riose may live. His 
punishments are mercy in comparison." 

"But six months, six months, in the enemy Base, with nothing to show for it." Devers' strong 
hands clasped each other tautly, so that his knuckles cracked. "Nothing to show for it!" 

"Well, now, wait. You remind me-" Barr fumbled in his pouch. "You might want to count this." 
And he tossed the small sphere of metal on the table. 

Devers snatched it. "What is it?" 

"The message capsule. The one that Riose received just before I jacked him. Does that count 
as something?" 



"I don't know. Depends on what's in it!" Devers sat down and turned it over carefully in his 
hand. 


When Barr stepped from his cold shower and, gratefully, into the mild warm current of the air 
dryer, he found Devers silent and absorbed at the workbench. 

The Siwennian slapped his body with a sharp rhythm and spoke above the punctuating sounds. 
"What are you doing?" 

Devers looked up. Droplets of perspiration glittered in his beard. "I'm going to open this 
capsule." 

"Can you open it without Riose's personal characteristic?" There was mild surprise in the 
Siwennian's voice. 

"If I can't, I'll resign from the Association and never skipper a ship for what's left of my life. I've 
got a three-way electronic analysis of the interior now, and I've got little jiggers that the Empire 
never heard of, especially made for jimmying capsules. I've been a burglar before this, y'know. 
A trader has to be something of everything." 

He bent low over the little sphere, and a small flat instrument probed delicately and sparked 
redly at each fleeting contact. 

He said, "This capsule is a crude job, anyway. These Imperial boys are no shakes at this small 
work. I can see that. Ever see a Foundation capsule? It's half the size and impervious to 
electronic analysis in the first place." 

And then he was rigid, the shoulder muscles beneath his tunic tautening visibly. His tiny probe 
pressed slowly- 

It was noiseless when it came, but Devers; relaxed and sighed. In his hand was the shining 
sphere with its message unrolled like a parchment tongue. 

"It's from Brodrig," he said. Then, with contempt, "The message medium is permanent. In a 
Foundation capsule, the message would be oxidized to gas within the minute." 

But Ducem Barr waved him silent. He read the message quickly. 

FROM: AMMEL BRODRIG, ENVOY EXTRAORDINARY OF HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY, PRIVY 
SECRETARY OF THE COUNCIL, AND PEER OF THE REALM. 

TO: BEL RIOSE, MILITARY GOVERNOR OF SIWENNA. GENERAL OF THE IMPERIAL 
FORCES, AND PEER OF THE REALM. I GREET YOU. 

PLANET #1 1 20 NO LONGER RESISTS. THE PLANS OF OFFENSE AS OUTLINED 
CONTINUE SMOOTHLY. THE ENEMY WEAKENS VISIBLY AND THE ULTIMATE ENDS IN 
VIEW WILL SURELY BE GAINED. 

Barr raised his head from the almost microscopic print and cried bitterly, "The fool! The 
forsaken blasted fop! That a. message?" 



"Huh?" said Devers. He was vaguely disappointed. 

"It says nothing," ground out Barr. "Our lick-spittle courtier is playing at general now. With Riose 
away, he is the field commander and must sooth his paltry spirit by spewing out his pompous 
reports concerning military affairs he has nothing to do with. 'So-and-so planet no longer 
resists.' 'The offensive moves on.' 'The enemy weakens.' The vacuum-headed peacock." 

"Well, now, wait a minute. Hold on-" 

"Throw it away." The old man turned away in mortification. "The Galaxy knows I never expected 
it to be world-shakingly important, but in wartime it is reasonable to assume that even the most 
routine order left undelivered might hamper military movements and lead to complications later. 
It's why I snatched it. But this! Better to have left it. It would have wasted a minute of Riose's 
time that will now be put to more constructive use." 

But Devers had arisen. "Will you hold on and stop throwing your weight around? For Seldon's 
sake-" 

He held out the sliver of message before Barr's nose, "Now read that again. What does he 
mean by 'ultimate ends in view'?" 

"The conquest of the Foundation. Well?" 

"Yes? And maybe he means the conquest of the Empire. You know he believes that to be the 
ultimate end." 

"And if he does?" 

"If he does!" Devers' one-sided smile was lost in his beard. "Why, watch then, and I'll show 
you." 

With one finger the lavishly monogrammed sheet of message-parchment was thrust back into 
its slot. With a soft twang, it disappeared and the globe was a smooth, unbroken whole again. 
Somewhere inside was the tiny oiled whir of the controls as they lost their setting by random 
movements. 

"Now there is no known way of opening this capsule without knowledge of Riose's personal 
characteristic, is there?" 

"To the Empire, no," said Barr. 

"Then the evidence it contains is unknown to us and absolutely authentic." 

"To the Empire, yes," said Barr. 

"And the Emperor can open it, can't he? Personal Characteristics of Government officials must 
be on file. We keep records of OL/r officials at the Foundation." 

"At the Imperial capital as well," agreed Barr. 

"Then when you, a Siwennian patrician and Peer of the Realm, tell this Cleon, this Emperor, 
that his favorite tame-parrot and his shiniest general are getting together to knock him over, 



and hand him the capsule as evidence, what will he think Brodrig's 'ultimate ends' are?" 

Barr sat down weakly. "Wait, I don't follow you." He stroked one thin cheek, and said, "You're 
not really serious, are you?" 

"I am." Devers was angrily excited. "Listen, nine out of the last ten Emperors got their throats 
cut, or their gizzards blasted out by one or another of their generals with bigtime notions in their 
heads. You told me that yourself more than once. Old man Emperor would believe us so fast it 
would make Riose's head swim." 

Barr muttered feebly, "He is serious, For the Galaxy's sake, man, you can't beat a Seldon crisis 
by a far-fetched, impractical, storybook scheme like that. Suppose you had never got hold of 
the capsule. Suppose Brodrig hadn't used the word 'ultimate.' Seldon doesn't depend on wild 
luck." 

"If wild luck comes our way, there's no law says Seldon can't take advantage of it." 

"Certainly. But ... but," Barr stopped, then spoke calmly but with visible restraint. "Look, in the 
first place, how will you get to the planet Trantor? You don't know its location in space, and I 
certainly don't remember the co-ordinates, to say nothing of the ephemerae. You don't even 
know your own position in space." 

"You can't get lost in space," grinned Devers. He was at the controls already. "Down we go to 
the nearest planet, and back we come with complete bearings and the best navigation charts 
Brodrig's hundred thousand smackers can buy." 

"And a blaster in our belly. Our descriptions are probably in every planet in this quarter of the 
Empire." 

"Doc," said Devers, patiently, "don't be a hick tom the sticks. Riose said my ship surrendered 
too easily and, brother, he wasn't kidding. This ship has enough fire-power and enough juice in 
its shield to hold off anything we're Rely to meet this deep inside the frontier. And we have 
personal shields, too. The Empire boys never found them, you know, but they weren't meant to 
be found." 

"All fight," said Barr, "all right. Suppose yourself on Trantor. How do you see the Emperor then? 
You think he keeps office hours?" 

"Suppose we worry about that on Trantor," said Devers. 

And Barr muttered helplessly, "All right again. I've wanted to see Trantor before I die for half a 
century now. Have your way." 

The hypernuclear motor was cut in. The lights flickered and there was the slight internal wrench 
that marked the shift into hyperspace. 



9. ON TRANTOR 

The stars were as thick as weeds in an unkempt field, and for the first time, Lathan Devers 
found the figures to the right of the decimal point of prime importance in calculating the cuts 
through the hyper-regions. There was a claustrophobic sensation about the necessity for leaps 
of not more than a light-year. There was a frightening harshness about a sky which glittered 
unbrokenly in every direction. It was being lost in a sea of radiation. 

And in the center of an open cluster of ten thousand stars, whose light tore to shreds the feebly 
encircling darkness, there circled the huge Imperial planet, Trantor. 

But it was more than a planet; it was the living pulse beat of an Empire of twenty million stellar 
systems. It had only one, function, administration; one purpose, government; and one 
manufactured product, law. 

The entire world was one functional distortion. There was no living object on its surface hut 
man, his pets, and his parasites. No blade of grass or fragment of uncovered soil could be 
found outside the hundred square miles of the Imperial Palace. No fresh water outside the 
Palace grounds existed but in the vast underground cisterns that held the water supply of a 
world. 

The lustrous, indestructible, incorruptible metal that was the unbroken surface of the planet was 
the foundation of the huge, metal structures that mazed the planet. They were structures 
connected by causeways; laced by corridors; cubbyholed by offices; basemented by the huge 
retail centers that covered square miles; penthoused by the glittering amusement world that 
sparkled into life each night. 

One could walk around the world of Trantor and never leave that one conglomerate building, 
nor see the city. 

A fleet of ships greater in number than all the war fleets the Empire had ever supported landed 
their cargoes on Trantor each day to feed the forty billions of humans who gave nothing in 
exchange but the fulfillment of the necessity of untangling the myriads of threads that spiraled 
into the central administration of the most complex government Humanity had ever known. 

Twenty agricultural worlds were the granary of Trantor. A universe was its servant. 

Tightly held by the huge metal arms on either side, the trade ship was gently lowered down the 
huge ramp that led to the hangar. Already Devers had fumed his way through the manifold 
complications of a world conceived in paper work and dedicated to the principle of the 
form-in-quadruplicate. 

There had been the preliminary halt in space, where the first of what had grown into a hundred 
questionnaires had been filled out. There were the hundred cross-examinations, the routine 
administration of a simple Probe, the photographing of the ship, the Characteristic-Analysis of 
the two men, and the subsequent recording of the same, the search for contraband, the 
payment of the entry tax - and finally the question of the identity cards and visitor's visa. 

Ducem Barr was a Siwennian and subject of the Emperor, but Lathan Devers was an unknown 



without the requisite documents. The official in charge at the moment was devastated with 
sorrow, but Devers could not enter. In fact, he would have to be held for official investigation. 

From somewhere a hundred credits in crisp, new bills backed by the estates of Lord Brodrig 
made their appearance, and changed bands quietly. The official hemmed importantly and the 
devastation of his sorrow was assuaged. A new form made its appearance from the appropriate 
pigeonhole. It was filled out rapidly and efficiently, with the Devers characteristic thereto 
formally and properly attached. 

The two men, trader and patrician, entered Siwenna. 

In the hangar, the trade ship was another vessel to be cached, photographed, recorded, 
contents noted, identity cards of passengers facsimiled, and for which a suitable fee was paid, 
recorded, and receipted. 

And then Devers was on a huge terrace under the bright white sun, along which women 
chattered, children shrieked, and men sipped drinks languidly and listened to the huge 
televisors blaring out the news of the Empire. 

Barr paid a requisite number of iridium coins and appropriated the uppermost member of a pile 
of newspapers. It was the Trantor Imperial News, official organ of the government. In the back 
of the news room, there was the soft clicking noise of additional editions being printed in 
long-distance sympathy with the busy machines at the Imperial News offices ten thousand 
miles away by corridor - six thousand by air-machine - just as ten million sets of copies were 
being likewise printed at that moment in ten million other news rooms all over the planet. 

Barr glanced at the headlines and said softly, "What shall we do first?" 

Devers tried to shake himself out of his depression. He was in a universe far removed from his 
own, on a world that weighted him down with its intricacy, among people whose doings were 
incomprehensible and whose language was nearly so. The gleaming metallic towers that 
surrounded him and continued onwards in never-ending multiplicity to beyond the horizon 
oppressed him; the whole busy, unheeding life of a world-metropolis cast him into the horrible 
gloom of isolation and pygmyish unimportance. 

He said, "I better leave it to you, doc." 

Barr was calm, low-voice. "I tried to tell you, but it's hard to believe without seeing for yourself, I 
know that. Do you know how many people want to see the Emperor every day? About one 
million. Do you know how many he sees? About ten. We'll have to work through the civil 
service, and that makes it harder. But we can't afford the aristocracy." 

"We have almost one hundred thousand." 

"A single Peer of the Realm would cost us that, and it would take at least three or four to form 
an adequate bridge to the Emperor. It may take fifty chief commissioners and senior 
supervisors to do the same, but they would cost us only a hundred apiece perhaps. I'll do the 
talking. In the first place, they wouldn't understand your accent, and in the second, you don't 
know the etiquette of Imperial bribery. It's an art, I assure you. Ah!" 



The third page of the Imperial News had what he wanted and he passed the paper to Devers. 

Devers read slowly. The vocabulary was strange, but he understood. He looked up, and his 
eyes were dark with concern. He slapped the news sheet angrily with the back of his hand. 

"You think this can be trusted?" 

"Within limits," replied Barr, calmly. "It's highly improbable that the Foundation fleet was wiped 
out. They've probably reported that several times already, if they've gone by the usual 
war-reporting technique of a world capital far from the actual scene of fighting. What it means, 
though, is that Riose has won another battle, which would be none-too-unexpected. It says he's 
captured Loris. Is that the capital planet of the Kingdom of Loris?" 

"Yes," brooded Devers, "or of what used to be the Kingdom of Loris. And it's not twenty parsecs 
from the Foundation. Doc, we've got to work fast." 

Barr shrugged, "You can't go fast on Trantor. If you try, you'll end up at the point of an 
atom-blaster, most likely." 

"How long will it take?" 

"A month, if we're lucky. A month, and our hundred thousand credits - if even that will suffice. 
And that is providing the Emperor does not take it into his head in the meantime to travel to the 
Summer Planets, where he sees no petitioners at all." 

"But the Foundation-" 

"-Will take care of itself, as heretofore. Come, there's the question of dinner. I'm hungry. And 
afterwards, the evening is ours and we may as well use it. We shall never see Trantor or any 
world like it again, you know." 

The Home Commissioner of the Outer Provinces spread his pudgy hands helplessly and 
peered at the petitioners with owlish nearsightedness. "But the Emperor is indisposed, 
gentlemen. It is really useless to take the matter to my superior. His Imperial Majesty has seen 
no one in a week." 

"He will see us," said Barr, with an affectation of confidence. "It is but a question of seeing a 
member of the staff of the Privy Secretary." 

"Impossible," said the commissioner emphatically. "It would be the worth of my job to attempt 
that. Now if you could but be more explicit concerning the nature of your business. I'm willing to 
help you, understand, but naturally I want something less vague, something I can present to my 
superior as reason for taking the matter further." 

"If my business were such that it could be told to any but the highest," suggested Barr, 
smoothly, "it would scarcely be important enough to rate audience with His Imperial Majesty. I 
propose that you take a chance. I might remind you that if His Imperial Majesty attaches the 
importance to our business which we guarantee that he will, you will stand certain to receive 
the honors you will deserve for helping us now." 

"Yes, but-" and the commissioner shrugged, wordlessly. 



"It's a chance," agreed Barr. "Naturally, a risk should have its compensation. It is a rather great 
favor to ask you, but we have already been greatly obliged with your kindness in offering us this 
opportunity to explain our problem. But if you would allow us to express our gratitude just 
slightly by-" 

Devers scowled. He had heard this speech with its slight variations twenty times in the past 
month. It ended, as always, in a quick shift of the half-hidden bills. But the epilogue differed 
here. Usually the bills vanished immediately; here they remained in plain view, while slowly the 
commissioner counted them, inspecting them front and back as he did so. 

There was a subtle change in his voice. "Backed by the Privy Secretary, hey? Good money!" 

"To get back to the subject-" urged Barr. 

"No, but wait," interrupted the commissioner, "let us go back by easy stages. I really do wish to 
know what your business can be. This money, it is fresh and new, and you must have a good 
deal, for it strikes me that you have seen other officials before me. Come, now, what about it?" 

Barr said, "I don't see what you are driving at." 

"Why, see here, it might be proven that you are upon the planet illegally, since the Identification 
and Entry Cards of your silent friend are certainly inadequate. He is not a subject of the 
Emperor." 

"I deny that." 

"It doesn't matter that you do," said the commissioner, with sudden bluntness. "The official who 
signed his Cards for the sum of a hundred credits has confessed - under pressure - and we 
know more of you than you think." 

"If you are hinting, sir, that the sum we have asked you to accept is inadequate in view of the 
risks-" 

The commissioner smiled. "On the contrary, it is more than adequate." He tossed the bills 
aside. "To return to what I was saying, it is the Emperor himself who has become interested in 
your case. Is it not true, sirs, that you have recently been guests of General Riose? Is it not true 
that you have escaped from the midst of his army with, to put it mildly, astonishing ease? Is it 
not true that you possess a small fortune in bills backed by Lord Brodrig's estates? In short, is it 
not true that you are a pair of spies and assassins sent here to - Well, you shall tell us yourself 
who paid you and for what!" 

"Do you know," said Barr, with silky anger, "I deny the right of a petty commissioner to accuse 
us of crimes. We will leave." 

"You will not leave." The commissioner arose, and his eyes no longer seemed near-sighted. 
"You need answer no question now; that will be reserved for a later - and more forceful - time. 
Nor am I a commissioner; I am a Lieutenant of the Imperial Police. You are under arrest." 

There was a glitteringly efficient blast-gun in his fist as he smiled. "There are greater men than 
you under arrest this day. It is a hornet's nest we are cleaning up." 



Devers snarled and reached slowly for his own gun. The lieutenant of police smiled more 
broadly and squeezed the contacts. The blasting line of force struck Devers' chest in an 
accurate blaze of destruction - that bounced harmlessly off his personal shield in sparkling 
spicules of light. 

Devers shot in turn, and the lieutenant's head fell from off an upper torso that had disappeared. 
It was still smiling as it lay in the jag of sunshine which entered through the new-made hole in 
the wall. 

It was through the back entrance that they left. 

Devers said huskily, "Quickly to the ship. They'll have the alarm out in no time." He cursed in a 
ferocious whisper. "It's another plan that's backfired. I could swear the space fiend himself is 
against me." 

It was in the open that they became aware of the jabbering crowds that surrounded the huge 
televisors. They had no time to wait; the disconnected roaring words that reached them, they 
disregarded. But Barr snatched a copy of the Imperial News before diving into the huge barn of 
the hangar, where the ship lifted hastily through a giant cavity burnt fiercely into the roof. 

"Can you get away from them?" asked Barr. 

Ten ships of the traffic-police wildly followed the runaway craft that had burst out of the lawful, 
radio-beamed Path of Leaving, and then broken every speed law in creation. Further behind 
still, sleek vessels of the Secret Service were lifting in pursuit of a carefully described ship 
manned by two thoroughly identified murderers. 

"Watch me," said Devers, and savagely shifted into hyperspace two thousand miles above the 
surface of Trantor. The shift, so near a planetary mass, meant unconsciousness for Barr and a 
fearful haze of pain for Devers, but light-years further, space above them was clear. 

Devers' somber pride in his ship burst to the surface. He said, "There's not an Imperial ship that 
could follow me anywhere." 

And then, bitterly, "But there is nowhere left to run to for us, and we can't fight their weight. 
What's there to do? What can anyone do?" 

Barr moved feebly on his cot. The effect of the hypershift had not yet worn off, and each of his 
muscles ached. He said, "No one has to do anything. It's all over. Here!" 

He passed the copy of the Imperial News that he still clutched, and the headlines were enough 
for the trader. 

"Recalled and arrested - Riose and Brodrig," Devers muttered. He stared blankly at Barr. 
"Why?" 

"The story doesn't say, but what does it matter? The war with the Foundation is over, and at 
this moment, Siwenna is revolting. Read the story and see." His voice was drifting off. "We'll 
stop in some of the provinces and find out the later details. If you don't mind, I'll go to sleep 
now." 



And he did. 


In grasshopper jumps of increasing magnitude, the trade ship was spanning the Galaxy in its 
return to the Foundation. 


10. THE WAR ENDS 

Lathan Devers felt definitely uncomfortable, and vaguely resentful. He had received his own 
decoration and withstood with mute stoicism the turgid oratory of the mayor which 
accompanied the slip of crimson ribbon. That had ended his share of the ceremonies, but, 
naturally, formality forced him to remain. And it was formality, chiefly - the type that couldn't 
allow him to yawn noisily or to swing a foot comfortably onto a chair seat - that made him long 
to be in space, where he belonged. 

The Siwennese delegation, with Ducem Barr a lionized member, signed the Convention, and 
Siwenna became the first province to pass directly from the Empire's political rule to the 
Foundation's economic one. 

Five Imperial Ships of the Line - captured when Siwenna rebelled behind the lines of the 
Empire's Border Fleet - flashed overhead, huge and massive, detonating a roaring salute as 
they passed over the city. 

Nothing but drinking, etiquette, and small talk now. 

A voice called him. It was Forell; the man who, Devers realized coldly, could buy twenty of him 
with a morning's profits - but a Forell who now crooked a finger at him with genial 
condescension. 

He stepped out upon the balcony into the cool night wind, and bowed properly, while scowling 
into his bristling beard. Barr was there, too; smiling. He said, "Devers, you'll have to come to my 
rescue. I'm being accused of modesty, a horrible and thoroughly unnatural crime." 

"Devers," Forell removed the fat cigar from the side of his mouth when he spoke, "Lord Barr 
claims that your trip to Cleon's capital had nothing to do with the recall of Riose." 

"Nothing at all, sir." Devers was curt. "We never saw the Emperor. The reports we picked up on 
our way back concerning the trial, showed it up to be the purest frameup. There was a mess of 
rigmarole about the general being tied up with subversive interests at the court." 

"And he was innocent?" 

"Riose?" interposed Barr. "Yes! By the Galaxy, yes. Brodrig was a traitor on general principles 
but was never guilty of the specific accusations brought against him. It was a judicial farce; but 
a necessary one, a predictable one, an inevitable one." 

"By psychohistorical necessity, I presume." Forell rolled the phrase sonorously with the 
humorous ease of long familiarity. 

"Exactly." Barr grew serious. "It never penetrated earlier, but once it was over and I could ... 



well ... look at the answers in the back of the book, the problem became simple. We can see, 
now , that the social background of the Empire makes wars of conquest impossible for it. Under 
weak Emperors, it is tom apart by generals competing for a worthless and surely death-bringing 
throne. Under strong Emperors, the Empire is frozen into a paralytic rigor in which 
disintegration apparently ceases for the moment, but only at the sacrifice of all possible 
growth." 

Forell growled bluntly through strong puffs, "You're not clear, Lord Barr." 

Barr smiled slowly. "I suppose so. It's the difficulty of not being trained in psychohistory. Words 
are a pretty fuzzy substitute for mathematical equations. But let's see now-" 

Barr considered, while Forell relaxed, back to railing, and Devers looked into the velvet sky and 
thought wonderingly of Trantor. 

Then Barr said, "You see, sir, you - and Devers - and everyone no doubt, had the idea that 
beating the Empire meant first prying apart the Emperor and his general. You, and Devers, and 
everyone else were right - right all the time, as far as the principle of internal disunion was 
concerned. 

"You were wrong, however, in thinking that this internal split was something to be brought about 
by individual acts, by inspirations of the moment. You tried bribery and lies. You appealed to 
ambition and to fear. But you got nothing for all your pains. In fact, appearances were worse 
after each attempt. 

"And through all this wild threshing up of tiny ripples, the Seldon tidal wave continued onward, 
quietly - but quite irresistibly." 

Ducem Barr turned away, and looked over the railing at the lights of a rejoicing city. Fie said, 
"There was a dead hand pushing all of us; the mighty general and the great Emperor; my world 
and your world - the dead hand of Hari Seldon. Fie knew that a man like Riose would have to 
fail, since it was his success that brought failure; and the greater the success, the surer the 
failure." 

Forell said dryly, "I can't say you're getting clearer." 

"A moment," continued Barr earnestly. "Look at the situation. A weak general could never have 
endangered us, obviously. A strong general during the time of a weak Emperor would never 
have endangered us, either; for he would have turned his arms towards a much more fruitful 
target. Events have shown that three-fourths of the Emperors of the last two centuries were 
rebel generals and rebel viceroys before they were Emperors. 

"So it is only the combination of strong Emperor and strong general that can harm the 
Foundation; for a strong Emperor can not be dethroned easily, and a strong general is forced to 
turn outwards, past the frontiers. 

"But, what keeps the Emperor strong? What kept Cleon strong? It's obvious. Fie is strong, 
because he permits no strong subjects. A courtier who becomes too rich, or a general who 
becomes too popular is dangerous. All the recent history of the Empire proves that to any 
Emperor intelligent enough to be strong. 



"Riose won victories, so the Emperor grew suspicious. All the atmosphere of the times forced 
him to be suspicious. Did Riose refuse a bribe? Very suspicious; ulterior motives. Did his most 
trusted courtier suddenly favor Riose? Very suspicious; ulterior motives. It wasn't the individual 
acts that were suspicious. Anything else would have done which is why our individual plots 
were unnecessary and rather futile. It was the success of Riose that was suspicious. So he was 
recalled, and accused, condemned, murdered. The Foundation wins again. 

"Look, there is not a conceivable combination of events that does not result in the Foundation 
winning. It was inevitable; whatever Riose did, whatever we did." 

The Foundation magnate nodded ponderously. "So! But what if the Emperor and the general 
had been the same person. Fley? What then? That's a case you didn't cover, so you haven't 
proved your point yet." 

Barr shrugged. "I can't prove anything; I haven't the mathematics. But I appeal to your reason. 
With an Empire in which every aristocrat, every strong man, every pirate can aspire to the 
Throne - and, as history shows, often successfully - what would happen to even a strong 
Emperor who preoccupied himself with foreign wars at the extreme end of the Galaxy? How 
long would he have to remain away from the capital before somebody raised the standards of 
civil war and forced him home. The social environment of the Empire would make that time 
short. 

"I once told Riose that not all the Empire's strength could swerve the dead hand of Hari 
Seldom" 

"Good! Good!" Forell was expansively pleased. "Then you imply the Empire can never threaten 
us again." 

"It seems to me so," agreed Barr. "Frankly, Cleon may not live out the year, and there's going to 
be a disputed succession almost as a matter of course, which might mean the last civil war for 
the Empire." 

"Then," said Forell, "there are no more enemies." 

Barr was thoughtful. "There's a Second Foundation." 

"At the other end of the Galaxy? Not for centuries." 

Devers turned suddenly at this, and his face was dark as he faced Forell. "There are internal 
enemies, perhaps." 

"Are there?" asked Forell, coolly. "Who, for instance?" 

"People, for instance, who might like to spread the wealth a bit, and keep it from concentrating 
too much out of the hands that work for it. See what I mean?" 


Slowly, Forell's gaze lost its contempt and grew one with the anger of Devers' own. 



PART II 
THE MULE 

11. BRIDE AND GROOM 

THE MULE Less is known of "The Mule" than of any character of comparable significance to 
Galactic history. Even the period of his greatest renown is known to us chiefly through the eyes 
of his antagonists and, principally, through those of a young bride.... 

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA 

Bayta's first sight of Haven was entirely the contrary of spectacular. Her husband pointed it out 
- a dull star lost in the emptiness of the Galaxy's edge. It was past the last sparse clusters, to 
where straggling points of light gleamed lonely. And even among these it was poor and 
inconspicuous. 

Toran was quite aware that as the earliest prelude to married life, the Red Dwarf lacked 
impressiveness and his lips curled self-consciously. "I know, Bay - It isn't exactly a proper 
change, is it? I mean from the Foundation to this." 

"A horrible change, Toran. I should never have married you." 

And when his face looked momentarily hurt, before he caught himself, she said with her special 
"cozy" tone, "All right, silly. Now let your lower lip droop and give me that special dying-duck 
look - the one just before you're supposed to bury your head on my shoulder, while I stroke 
your hair full of static electricity. You were fishing for some drivel, weren't you? You were 
expecting me to say 'I'd be happy anywhere with you, Toran!' or 'The interstellar depths 
themselves would be home, my sweet, were you but with me!' Now you admit it." 

She pointed a finger at him and snatched it away an instant before his teeth closed upon it. 

He said, "If I surrender, and admit you're right, will you prepare dinner?" 

She nodded contentedly. He smiled, and just looked at her. 

She wasn't beautiful on the grand scale to others - he admitted that - even if everybody did 
look twice. Her hair was dark and glossy, though straight, her mouth a bit wide - but her 
meticulous, close-textured eyebrows separated a white, unlined forehead from the warmest 
mahogany eyes ever filled with smiles. 

And behind a very sturdily-built and staunchly-defended facade of practical, unromantic, 
hard-headedness towards life, there was just that little pool of softness that would never show if 
you poked for it, but could be reached if you knew just how - and never let on that you were 
looking for it. 

Toran adjusted the controls unnecessarily and decided to relax. He was one interstellar jump, 



and then several milli-microparsecs "on the straight" before manipulation by hand was 
necessary. He leaned over backwards to look into the storeroom, where Bayta was juggling 
appropriate containers. 

There was quite a bit of smugness about his attitude towards Bayta - the satisfied awe that 
marks the triumph of someone who has been hovering at the edge of an inferiority complex for 
three years. 

After all he was a provincial - and not merely a provincial, but the son of a renegade Trader. 
And she was of the Foundation itself - and not merely that, but she could trace her ancestry 
back to Mallow. 

And with all that, a tiny quiver underneath. To take her back to Haven, with its rock-world and 
cave-cities was bad enough. To have her face the traditional hostility of Trader for Foundation - 
nomad for city dweller - was worse. 

Still - After supper, the last jump! 

Haven was an angry crimson blaze, and the second planet was a ruddy patch of light with 
atmosphere-blurred rim and a half-sphere of darkness. Bayta leaned over the large view table 
with its spidering of crisscross lines that centered Haven II neatly. 

She said gravely, "I wish I had met your father first. If he takes a dislike to me-" 

"Then," said Toran matter-of-factly, "you would be the first pretty girl to inspire that in him. 
Before he lost his arm and stopped roving around the Galaxy, he - Well, if you ask him about it, 
he'll talk to you about it till your ears wear down to a nubbin. After a while I got to thinking that 
he was embroidering; because he never told the same story twice the same way-" 

Haven II was rushing up at them now. The landlocked sea wheeled ponderously below them, 
slate-gray in the lowering dimness and lost to sight, here and there, among the wispy clouds. 
Mountains jutted raggedly along the coast. 

The sea became wrinkled with nearness and, as it veered off past the horizon just at the end, 
there was one vanishing glimpse of shore-hugging ice fields. 

Toran grunted under the fierce deceleration, "Is your suit locked?" 

Bayta's plump face was round and ruddy in the incasing sponge-foam of the internally-heated, 
skin-clinging costume. 

The ship lowered crunchingly on the open field just short of the lifting of the plateau. 

They climbed out awkwardly into the solid darkness of the outer-galactic night, and Bayta 
gasped as the sudden cold bit, and the thin wind swirled emptily. Toran seized her elbow and 
nudged her into an awkward run over the smooth, packed ground towards the sparking of 
artificial light in the distance. 

The advancing guards met them halfway, and after a whispered exchange of words, they were 
taken onward. The wind and the cold disappeared when the gate of rock opened and then 
closed behind them. The warm interior, white with wall-light, was filled with an incongruous 



humming bustle. Men looked up from their desks, and Toran produced documents. 

They were waved onward after a short glance and Toran whispered to his wife, "Dad must have 
fixed up the preliminaries. The usual lapse here is about five hours." 

They burst into the open and Bayta said suddenly, "Oh, my-" 

The cave city was in daylight - the white daylight of a young sun. Not that there was a sun, of 
course. What should have been the sky was lost in the unfocused glow of an over-all brilliance. 
And the warm air was properly thick and fragrant with greenery. 

Bayta said, "Why, Toran, it's beautiful." 

Toran grinned with anxious delight. "Well, now, Bay, it isn't like anything on the Foundation, of 
course, but it's the biggest city on Haven II - twenty thousand people, you know - and you'll get 
to like it. No amusement palaces, I'm afraid, but no secret police either." 

"Oh, Torie, it's just like a toy city. It's all white and pink - and so clean." 

"Well-" Toran looked at the city with her. The houses were two stories high for the most part, 
and of the smooth vein rock indigenous to the region. The spires of the Foundation were 
missing, and the colossal community houses of the Old Kingdoms - but the smallness was 
there and the individuality; a relic of personal initiative in a Galaxy of mass life. 

He snapped to sudden attention. "Bay - There's Dad! Right there - where I'm pointing, silly. 
Don't you see him?" 

She did. It was just the impression of a large man, waving frantically, fingers spread wide as 
though groping wildly in air. The deep thunder of a drawn-out shout reached them. Bayta trailed 
her husband, rushing downwards over the close-cropped lawn. She caught sight of a smaller 
man, white-haired, almost lost to view behind the robust One-arm, who still waved and still 
shouted. 

Toran cried over his shoulder, "It's my father's half-brother. The one who's been to the 
Foundation. You know." 

They met in the grass, laughing and incoherent, and Toran's father let out a final whoop for 
sheer joy. He hitched at his short jacket and adjusted the metal-chased belt that was his one 
concession to luxury. 

His eyes shifted from one of the youngsters to the other, and then he said, a little out of breath, 
"You picked a rotten day to return home, boy!" 

"What? Oh, it is Seldon's birthday, isn't it?" 

"It is. I had to rent a car to make the trip here, and dragoon Randu to drive it. Not a public 
vehicle to be had at gun's point." 

His eyes were on Bayta now, and didn't leave. He spoke to her more softly, "I have the crystal 
of you right here - and it's good, but I can see the fellow who took it was an amateur." 



He had the small cube of transparency out of his jacket pocket and in the light the laughing little 
face within sprang to vivid colored life as a miniature Bayta. 

"That one!" said Bayta. "Now I wonder why Toran should send that caricature. I'm surprised you 
let me come near you, sir." 

"Are you now? Call me Fran. I'll have none of this fancy mess. For that, I think you can take my 
arm, and we'll go on to the car. Till now I never did think my boy knew what he was ever up to. I 
think I'll change that opinion. I think I'll have to change that opinion." 

Toran said to his half uncle softly, "How is the old man these days? Does he still hound the 
women?" 

Randu puckered up all over his face when he smiled. "When he can, Toran, when he can. 

There are times when he remembers that his next birthday will be his sixtieth, and that 
disheartens him. But he shouts it down, this evil thought, and then he is himself. He is a Trader 
of the ancient type. But you, Toran. Where did you find such a pretty wife?" 

The young man chuckled and linked arms. "Do you want a three years' history at a gasp, 
uncle?" 

It was in the small living room of the home that Bayta struggled out of her traveling cloak and 
hood and shook her hair loose. She sat down, crossing her knees, and returned the 
appreciative stare of this large, ruddy man. 

She said, "I know what you're trying to estimate, and I'll help you; Age, twenty-four, height, 
five-four, weight, one-ten, educational specialty, history." She noticed that he always crooked 
his stand so as to hide the missing arm. But now Fran leaned close and said, "Since you 
mention it -weight, one-twenty." 

He laughed loudly at her flush. Then he said to the company in general, "You can always tell a 
woman's weight by her upper arm - with due experience, of course. Do you want a drink, Bay?" 

"Among other things," she said, and they left together, while Toran busied himself at the book 
shelves to check for new additions. 

Fran returned alone and said, "She'll be down later." 

He lowered himself heavily into the large comer chair and placed his stiff-jointed left leg on the 
stool before it. The laughter had left his red face, and Toran turned to face him. 

Fran said, "Well, you're home, boy, and I'm glad you are. I like your woman. She's no whining 
ninny." 

"I married her," said Toran simply. 

"Well, that's another thing altogether, boy." His eyes darkened. "It's a foolish way to tie up the 
future. In my longer life, and more experienced, I never did such a thing." 

Randu interrupted from the comer where he stood quietly. "Now Franssart, what comparisons 
are you making? Till your crash landing six years ago you were never in one spot long enough 



to establish residence requirements for marriage, And since then, who would have you?" 

The one-armed man jerked erect in his seat and replied hotly, "Many, you snowy dotard-" 

Toran said with hasty tact, "It's largely a legal formality, Dad. The situation has its 
conveniences." 

"Mostly for the woman," grumbled Fran. 

"And even if so," agreed Randu, "it's up to the boy to decide. Marriage is an old custom among 
the Foundationers." 

"The Foundationers are not fit models for an honest Trader," smoldered Fran. 

Toran broke in again, "My wife is a Foundationer." Fie looked from one to the other, and then 
said quietly, "She's coming." 

The conversation took a general turn after the evening meal, which Fran had spiced with three 
tales of reminiscence composed of equal parts of blood, women, profits, and embroidery. The 
small televisor was on, and some classic drama was playing itself out in an unregarded 
whisper. Randu had hitched himself into a more comfortable position on the low couch and 
gazed past the slow smoke of his long pipe to where Bayta had knelt down upon the softness 
of the white fur mat brought back once long ago from a trade mission and now spread out only 
upon the most ceremonious occasions. 

"You have studied history, my girl?" he asked, pleasantly. 

Bayta nodded. "I was the despair of my teachers, but I learned a bit, eventually." 

"A citation for scholarship," put in Toran, smugly, "that's all!" 

"And what did you learn?" proceeded Randu, smoothly. 

"Everything? Now?" laughed the girl. 

The old man smiled gently. "Well then, what do you think of the Galactic situation?" 

"I think," said Bayta, concisely, "that a Seldon crisis is pending - and that if it isn't then away 
with the Seldon plan altogether. It is a failure." 

("Whew," muttered Fran, from his comer. "What a way to speak of Seldon." But he said nothing 
aloud.) 

Randu sucked at his pipe speculatively. "Indeed? Why do you say that? I was to the 
Foundation, you know, in my younger days, and I, too, once thought great dramatic thoughts. 
But, now, why do you say that?" 

"Well," Bayta's eyes misted with thought as she curled her bare toes into the white softness of 
the rug and nestled her little chin in one plump hand, "it seems to me that the whole essence of 
Seldon's plan was to create a world better than the ancient one of the Galactic Empire. It was 
failing apart, that world, three centuries ago, when Seldon first established the Foundation - 
and if history speaks truly, it was falling apart of the triple disease of inertia, despotism, and 



maldistribution of the goods of the universe." 

Randu nodded slowly, while Toran gazed with proud, luminous eyes at his wife, and Fran in the 
comer clucked his tongue and carefully refilled his glass. 

Bayta said, "If the story of Seldon is true, he foresaw the complete collapse of the Empire 
through his Jaws of psychohistory, and was able to predict the necessary thirty thousand years 
of barbarism before the establishment of a new Second Empire to restore civilization and 
culture to humanity. It was the whole aim of his life-work to set up such conditions as would 
insure a speedier rejuvenation," 

The deep voice of Fran burst out, "And that's why he established the two Foundations, honor 
be to his name." 

"And that's why he established the two Foundations," assented Bayta. "Our Foundation was a 
gathering of the scientists of the dying Empire intended to carry on the science and learning of 
man to new heights. And the Foundation was so situated in space and the historical 
environment was such that through the careful calculations of his genius, Seldon foresaw that 
in one thousand years, it would become a newer, greater Empire." 

There was a reverent silence. 

The girl said softly, "It's an old story. You all know it. For almost three centuries every human 
being of the Foundation has known it. But I thought it would be appropriate to go through it - 
just quickly. Today is Seldon's birthday, you know, and even if I am of the Foundation, and you 
are of Flaven, we have that in common-" 

She lit a cigarette slowly, and watched the glowing tip absently. "The laws of history are as 
absolute as the laws of physics, and if the probabilities of error are greater, it is only because 
history does not deal with as many humans as physics does atoms, so that individual variations 
count for more. Seldon predicted a series of crises through the thousand years of growth, each 
of which would force a new turning of our history into a pre-calculated path. It is those crises 
which direct us - and therefore a crisis must come now. 

"Now!" she repeated, forcefully. "It's almost a century since the last one, and in that century, 
every vice of the Empire has been repeated in the Foundation. Inertia! Our ruling class knows 
one law; no change. Despotism! They know one rule; force. Maldistribution! They know one 
desire; to hold what is theirs." 

"While others starve!" roared Fran suddenly with a mighty blow of his fist upon the arm of his 
chair. "Girl, your words are pearls. The fat guts on their moneybags ruin the Foundation, while 
the brave Traders hide their poverty on dregs of worlds like Flaven. It's a disgrace to Seldon, a 
casting of dirt in his face, a spewing in his beard." Fie raised his arm high, and then his face 
lengthened. "If I had my other arm! If - once - they had listened to me!" 

"Dad," said Toran, "take it easy." 

"Take it easy. Take it easy," his father mimicked savagely. "We'll live here and die here forever 
- and you say, take it easy." 



"That's our modern Lathan Devers," said Randu, gesturing with his pipe, "this Fran of ours. 
Devers died in the slave mines eighty years ago with your husband's great-grandfather, 
because he lacked wisdom and didn't lack heart-" 

"Yes, by the Galaxy, I'd do the same if I were he," swore Fran. "Devers was the greatest Trader 
in history - greater than the overblown windbag, Mallow, the Foundationers worship. If the 
cutthroats who lord the Foundation killed him because he loved justice, the greater the 
blood-debt owed them." 

"Go on, girl," said Randu. "Go on, or, surely, he'll talk a the night and rave all the next day." 

"There's nothing to go on about," she said, with a sudden gloom. "There must be a crisis, but I 
don't know how to make one. The progressive forces on the Foundation are oppressed 
fearfully. You Traders may have the will, but you are hunted and disunited. If all the forces of 
good will in and out of the Foundation could combine-" 

Fran's laugh was a raucous jeer. "Listen to her, Randu, listen to her. In and out of the 
Foundation, she says. Girl, girl, there's no hope in the flab-sides of the Foundation. Among 
them some hold the whip and the rest are whipped dead whipped. Not enough spunk left in the 
whole rotten world to outface one good Trader." 

Bayta's attempted interruptions broke feebly against the overwhelming wind. 

Toran leaned over and put a hand over her mouth. "Dad," he said, coldly, "you've never been 
on the Foundation. You know nothing about it. I tell you that the underground there is brave and 
daring enough. I could tell you that Bayta was one of them-" 

"All right, boy, no offense. Now, where's the cause for anger?" Fie was genuinely perturbed. 

Toran drove on fervently, "The trouble with you, Dad, is that you've got a provincial outlook. 

You think because some hundred thousand Traders scurry into holes on an unwanted planet at 
the end of nowhere, that they're a great people. Of course, any tax collector from the 
Foundation that gets here never leaves again, but that's cheap heroism. What would you do if 
the Foundation sent a fleet?" 

"We'd blast them," said Fran, sharply. 

"And get blasted - with the balance in their favor. You're outnumbered, outarmed, outorganized 
- and as soon as the Foundation thinks it worth its while, you'll realize that. So you had better 
seek your allies - on the Foundation itself, if you can." 

"Randu, said Fran, looking at his brother like a great, helpless bull. 

Randu took his pipe away from his lips, "The boy's right, Fran. When you listen to the little 
thoughts deep inside you, you know he is. But they're uncomfortable thoughts, so you drown 
them out with that roar of yours. But they're still there. Toran, I'll tell you why I brought all this 
up." 

Fie puffed thoughtfully awhile, then dipped his pipe into the neck of the tray, waited for the silent 
flash, and withdrew it clean. Slowly, he filled it again with precise tamps of his little finger. 



He said, "Your little suggestion of Foundation's interest in us, Toran, is to the point. There have 
been two recent visits lately - for tax purposes. The disturbing point is that the second visitor 
was accompanied by a light patrol ship. They landed in Gleiar City - giving us the miss for a 
change - and they never lifted off again, naturally. But now they'll surely be back. Your father is 
aware of all this, Toran, he really is. 

"Look at the stubborn rakehell. He knows Haven is in trouble, and he knows we're helpless, but 
he repeats his formulas. It warms and protects him. But once he's had his say, and roared his 
defiance, and feels he's discharged his duty as a man and a Bull Trader, why he's as 
reasonable as any of us." 

"Any of who?" asked Bayta. 

He smiled at her. "We've formed a little group, Bayta - just in our city. We haven't done 
anything, yet. We haven't even managed to contact the other cities yet, but it's a start." 

"But towards what?" 

Randu shook his head. "We don't know-yet. We hope for a miracle. We have decided that, as 
you say, a Seldon crisis must be at hand." He gestured widely upwards. "The Galaxy is full of 
the chips and splinters of the broken Empire. The generals swarm. Do you suppose the time 
may come when one will grow bold?" 

Bayta considered, and shook her head decisively, so that the long straight hair with the single 
inward curl at the end swirled about her ears. "No, not a chance. There's not one of those 
generals who doesn't know that an attack on the Foundation is suicide. Bel Riose of the old 
Empire was a better man than any of them, and he attacked with the resources of a galaxy, and 
couldn't win against the Seldon Plan. Is there one general that doesn't know that?" 

"But what if we spur them on?" 

"Into where? Into an atomic furnace? With what could you possibly spur them?" 

"Well, there is one - a new one. In this past year or two, there has come word of a strange man 
whom they call the Mule." 

"The Mule?" She considered. "Ever hear of him, Torie?" 

Toran shook his head. She said, "What about him?" 

"I don't know. But he wins victories at, they say, impossible odds. The rumors may be 
exaggerated, but it would be interesting, in any case, to become acquainted with him. Not every 
man with sufficient ability and sufficient ambition would believe in Hari Seldon and his laws of 
psychohistory. We could encourage that disbelief. He might attack." 

"And the Foundation would win." 

"Yes - but not necessarily easily. It might be a crisis, and we could take advantage of such a 
crisis to force a compromise with the despots of the Foundation. At the worst, they would forget 
us long enough to enable us to plan farther." 



"What do you think, Torie?" 

Toran smiled feebly and pulled at a loose brown curl that fell over one eye. "The way he 
describes it, it can't hurt; but who is the Mule? What do you know of him, Randu?" 

"Nothing yet. For that, we could use you, Toran. And your wife, if she's willing. We've talked of 
this, your father and I. We've talked of this thoroughly." 

"In what way, Randu? What do you want of us?" The young man cast a quick inquisitive look at 
his wife. 

"Have you had a honeymoon?" 

"Well ... yes ... if you can call the trip from the Foundation a honeymoon." 

"How about a better one on Kalgan? It's semitropical beaches - water sports - bird hunting - 
quite the vacation spot. It's about seven thousand parsecs in-not too far." 

"What's on Kalgan?" 

"The Mule! His men, at least. He took it last month, and without a battle, though Kalgan's 
warlord broadcast a threat to blow the planet to ionic dust before giving it up." 

"Where's the warlord now?" 

"He isn't," said Randu, with a shrug. "What do you say?" 

"But what are we to do?" 

"I don't know. Fran and I are old; we're provincial. The Traders of Haven are all essentially 
provincial. Even you say so. Our trading is of a very restricted sort, and we're not the Galaxy 
roamers our ancestors were, Shut up, Fran! But you two know the Galaxy. Bayta, especially, 
speaks with a nice Foundation accent. We merely wish whatever you can find out. If you can 
make contact ... but we wouldn't expect that. Suppose you two think it over. You can meet our 
entire group if you wish ... oh, not before next week. You ought to have some time to catch your 
breath." 

There was a pause and then Fran roared, "Who wants; another drink? I mean, besides me?" 


12. CAPTAIN AND MAYOR 

Captain Han Pritcher was unused to the luxury of his surroundings and by no means 
impressed. As a general thing, he discouraged self-analysis and all forms of philosophy and 
metaphysics not directly connected with his work. 

It helped. 

His work consisted largely of what the War Department called "intelligence," the sophisticates, 
"espionage," and the romanticists, "spy stuff." And, unfortunately, despite the frothy shrillness of 
the televisors, "intelligence," "espionage," and "spy stuff" are at best a sordid business of 



routine betrayal and bad faith. It is excused by society since it is in the "interest of the State," 
but since philosophy seemed always to lead Captain Pritcher to the conclusion that even in that 
holy interest, society is much more easily soothed than one's own conscience - he discouraged 
philosophy. 

And now, in the luxury of the mayor's anteroom, his thoughts turned inward despite himself. 

Men had been promoted over his head continuously, though of lesser ability - that much was 
admitted. He had withstood an eternal rain of black marks and official reprimands, and survived 
it. And stubbornly he had held to his own way in the firm belief that insubordination in that same 
holy "interest of the State" would yet be recognized for the service it was. 

So here he was in the anteroom of the mayor-with five soldiers as a respectful guard, and 
probably a court-martial awaiting him. 

The heavy, marble doors rolled apart smoothly, silently, revealing satiny walls, a red plastic 
carpeting, and two more marble doors, metal-inlaid, within. Two officials in the straight-lined 
costume of three centuries back, stepped out, and called: 

"An audience to Captain Han Pritcher of Information." 

They stepped back with a ceremonious bow as the captain started forward. His escort stopped 
at the outer door, and he entered the inner alone. 

On the other side of the doors, in a large room strangely simple, behind a large desk strangely 
angular, sat a small man, almost lost in the immensity, 

Mayor Indbur - successively the third of that name - was the grandson of the first Indbur, who 
had been brutal and capable; and who had exhibited the first quality in spectacular fashion by 
his manner of seizing power, and the latter by the skill with which he put an end to the last 
farcical remnants of free election and the even greater skill with which he maintained a 
relatively peaceful rule. 

Mayor Indbur was also the son of the second Indbur, who was the first Mayor of the Foundation 
to succeed to his post by right of birth - and who was only half his father, for he was merely 
brutal. 

So Mayor Indbur was the third of the name and the second to succeed by right of birth, and he 
was the least of the three, for he was neither brutal nor capable - but merely an excellent 
bookkeeper born wrong. 

Indbur the Third was a peculiar combination of ersatz characteristics to all but himself. 

To him, a stilted geometric love of arrangement was "system," an indefatigable and feverish 
interest in the pettiest facets of day-to-day bureaucracy was "industry," indecision when right 
was "caution," and blind stubbornness when wrong, "determination." 

And withal he wasted no money, killed no man needlessly, and meant extremely well. 

If Captain Pritcher's gloomy thoughts ran along these lines as he remained respectfully in place 
before the large desk, the wooden arrangement of his features yielded no insight into the fact. 



He neither coughed, shifted weight, nor shuffled his feet until the thin face of the mayor lifted 
slowly as the busy stylus ceased in its task of marginal notations, and a sheet of close-printed 
paper was lifted from one neat stack and placed upon another neat stack. 

Mayor Indbur clasped his hands carefully before him, deliberately refraining from disturbing the 
careful arrangement of desk accessories. 

He said, in acknowledgment, "Captain Han Pritcher of Information." 

And Captain Pritcher in strict obedience to protocol bent one knee nearly to the ground and 
bowed his head until he heard the words of release. 

"Arise, Captain Pritcher!" 

The mayor said with an air of warm sympathy, "You are here, Captain Pritcher, because of 
certain disciplinary action taken against yourself by your superior officer. The papers 
concerning such action have come, in the ordinary course of events, to my notice, and since no 
event in the Foundation is of disinterest to me, I took the trouble to ask for further information 
on your case. You are not, I hope, surprised." 

Captain Pritcher said unemotionally, "Excellence, no. Your justice is proverbial." 

"Is it? Is it?" His tone was pleased, and the tinted contact lenses he wore caught the light in a 
manner that imparted a hard, dry gleam to his eyes. Meticulously, he fanned out a series of 
metal-bound folders before him. The parchment sheets within crackled sharply as he turned 
them, his long finger following down the line as he spoke. 

"I have your record here, captain - complete. You are forty-three and have been an Officer of 
the Armed Forces for seventeen years. You were born in Loris, of Anacreonian parents, no 
serious childhood diseases, an attack of myo ... well, that's of no importance ... education, 
premilitary, at the Academy of Sciences, major, hyper-engines, academic standing ... hm-m-m, 
very good, you are to be congratulated ... entered the Army as Under-Officer on the one 
hundred second day of the 293rd year of the Foundation Era." 

He lifted his eyes momentarily as he shifted the first folder, and opened the second. 

"You see," he said, "in my administration, nothing is left to chance. Order! System!" 

He lifted a pink, scented jelly-globule to his lips. It was his one vice, and but dolingly indulged 
in. Witness the fact that the mayor's desk lacked that almost-inevitable atom flash for the 
disposal of dead tobacco. For the mayor did not smoke. 

Nor, as a matter of course, did his visitors. 

The mayor's voice droned on, methodically, slurringly, mumblingly - now and then interspersed 
with whispered comments of equally mild and equally ineffectual commendation or reproof. 

Slowly, he replaced the folders as originally, in a single neat pile. 

"Well, captain," he said, briskly, "your record is unusual. Your ability is outstanding, it would 
seem, and your services valuable beyond question. I note that you have been wounded in the 



line of duty twice, and that you have been awarded the Order of Merit for bravery beyond the 
call of duty. Those are facts not lightly to be minimized." 

Captain Pritcher's expressionless face did not soften. He remained stiffly erect. Protocol 
required that a subject honored by an audience with the mayor may not sit down - a point 
perhaps needlessly reinforced by the fact that only one chair existed in the room, the one 
underneath the mayor. Protocol further required no statements other than those needed to 
answer a direct question. 

The mayor's eyes bore down hard upon the soldier and his voice grew pointed and heavy. 
"However, you have not been promoted in ten years, and your superiors report, over and over 
again, of the unbending stubbornness of your character. You are reported to be chronically 
insubordinate, incapable of maintaining a correct attitude towards superior officers, apparently 
uninterested in maintaining frictionless relationships with your colleagues, and an incurable 
troublemaker, besides. How do you explain that, captain?" 

"Excellence, I do what seems right to me. My deeds on behalf of the State, and my wounds in 
that cause bear witness that what seems fight to me is also in the interest of the State." 

"A soldierly statement, captain, but a dangerous doctrine. More of that, later. Specifically, you 
are charged with refusing an assignment three times in the face of orders signed by my legal 
delegates. What have you to say to that?" 

"Excellence, the assignment lacks significance in a critical time, where matters of first 
importance are being ignored." 

"Ah, and who tells you these matters you speak of are of the first importance at all, and if they 
are, who tells you further that they are ignored?" 

"Excellence, these things are quite evident to me. My experience and my knowledge of events 
- the value of neither of which my superiors deny - make it plain." 

"But, my good captain, are you blind that you do not see that by arrogating to yourself the right 
to determine Intelligence policy, you usurp the duties of your superior?" 

"Excellence, my duty is primarily to the State, and not to my superior." 

"Fallacious, for your superior has his superior, and that superior is myself, and I am the State. 
But come, you shall have no cause to complain of this justice of mine that you say is proverbial. 
State in your own words the nature of the breach in discipline that has brought all this on." 

"Excellence, my duty is primarily to the State, and not to my living the life of a retired merchant 
mariner upon the world of Kalgan. My instructions were to direct Foundation activity upon the 
planet, perfect an organization to act as check upon the warlord of Kalgan, particularly as 
regards his foreign policy." 

"This is known to me. Continue!" 

"Excellence, my reports have continually stressed the strategic positions of Kalgan and the 
systems it controls. I have reported on the ambition of the warlord, his resources, his 



determination to extend his domain and his essential friendliness - or, perhaps, neutrality - 
towards the Foundation." 

"I have read your reports thoroughly. Continue!" 

"Excellence, I returned two months ago. At that time, there was no sign of impending war; no 
sign of anything but an almost superfluity of ability to repel any conceivable attack. One month 
ago, an unknown soldier of fortune took Kalgan without a fight. The man who was once warlord 
of Kalgan is apparently no longer alive. Men do not speak of treason - they speak only of the 
power and genius of this strange condottiere - this Mule." 

"This who?" the mayor leaned forward, and looked offended. 

"Excellence, he is known as the Mule. He is spoken of little, in a factual sense, but I have 
gathered the scraps and fragments of knowledge and winnowed out the most probable of them. 
He is apparently a man of neither birth nor standing. His father, unknown. His mother, dead in 
childbirth. His upbringing, that of a vagabond. His education, that of the tramp worlds, and the 
backwash alleys of space. He has no name other than that of the Mule, a name reportedly 
applied by himself to himself, and signifying, by popular explanation, his immense physical 
strength, and stubbornness of purpose." 

"What is his military strength, captain? Never mind his physique." 

"Excellence, men speak of huge fleets, but in this they may be influenced by the strange fall of 
Kalgan. The territory he controls is not large, though its exact limits are not capable of definite 
determination. Nevertheless, this man must be investigated." 

"Hm-m-m. So! So!" The mayor fell into a reverie, and slowly with twenty-four strokes of his 
stylus drew six squares in hexagonal arrangements upon the blank top sheet of a pad, which 
he tore off, folded neatly in three parts and slipped into the wastepaper slot at his right hand. It 
slid towards a clean and silent atomic disintegration. 

"Now then, tell me, captain, what is the alternative? You have told me what 'must' be 
investigated. What have you been ordered to investigate?" 

"Excellence, there is a rat hole in space that, it seems, does not pay its taxes." 

"Ah, and is that all? You are not aware, and have not been told that these men who do not pay 
their taxes, are descendants of the wild Traders of our early days - anarchists, rebels, social 
maniacs who claim Foundation ancestry and deride Foundation culture. You are not aware, 
and have not been told, that this rat hole in space, is not one, but many; that these rat holes are 
in greater number than we know; that these rat holes conspire together, one with the other, and 
all with the criminal elements that still exist throughout Foundation territory. Even here, captain, 
even here!" 

The mayor's momentary fire subsided quickly. "You are not aware, captain?" 

"Excellence, I have been told all this. But as servant of the State, I must serve faithfully - and 
he serves most faithfully who serves Truth. Whatever the political implications of these dregs of 
the ancient Traders - the warlords who have inherited the splinters of the old Empire have the 



power. The Traders have neither arms nor resources. They have not even unity. I am not a tax 
collector to be sent on a child's errand." 


"Captain Pritcher, you are a soldier, and count guns. It is a failing to be allowed you up to the 
point where it involves disobedience to myself. Take care. My justice is not simply weakness. 
Captain, it has already been proven that the generals of the Imperial Age and the warlords of 
the present age are equally impotent against us. Seldon's science which predicts the course of 
the Foundation is based, not on individual heroism, as you seem to believe, but on the social 
and economic trends of history. We have passed successfully through four crises already, have 
we not?" 

"Excellence, we have. Yet Seldon's science is known only to Seldon. We ourselves have but 
faith. In the first three crises, as I have been carefully taught, the Foundation was led by wise 
leaders who foresaw the nature of the crises and took the proper precautions. Otherwise - who 
can say?" 

"Yes, captain, but you omit the fourth crisis. Come, captain, we had no leadership worthy of the 
name then, and we faced the cleverest opponent, the heaviest armor, the strongest force of all. 
Yet we won by the inevitability of history." 

"Excellence, that is true. But this history you mention became inevitable only after we had 
fought desperately for over a year. The inevitable victory we won cost us half a thousand ships 
and half a million men. Excellence, Seldon's plan helps those who help themselves." 

Mayor Indbur frowned and grew suddenly tired of his patient exposition. It occurred to him that 
there was a fallacy in condescension, since it was mistaken for permission to argue eternally; to 
grow contentious; to wallow in dialectic. Fie said, stiffly, "Nevertheless, captain, Seldon 
guarantees victory over the warlords, and I can not, in these busy times, indulge in a dispersal 
of effort. These Traders you dismiss are Foundation-derived. A war with them would be a civil 
war. Seldon's plan makes no guarantee there for us - since they anc/we are Foundation. So 
they must be brought to heel. You have your orders." 

"Excellence-" 

"You have been asked no question, captain. You have your orders. You will obey those orders. 
Further argument of any sort with myself or those representing myself will be considered 
treason. You are excused." 

Captain Flan Pritcher knelt once more, then left with slow, backward steps. 

Mayor Indbur, third of his name, and second mayor of Foundation history to be so by fight of 
birth, recovered his equilibrium, and lifted another sheet of paper from the neat stack at his left. 
It was a report on the saving of funds due to the reduction of the quantity of metal-foam edging 
on the uniforms of the police force. Mayor Indbur crossed out a superfluous comma, corrected 
a misspelling, made three marginal notations, and placed it upon the neat stack at his fight. Fie 
lifted another sheet of paper from the neat stack at his left. 

Captain Flan Pritcher of Information found a Personal Capsule waiting for him when he returned 
to barracks. It contained orders, terse and redly underlined with a stamped "URGENT"' across 



it, and the whole initialed with a precise, capital "I". 

Captain Han Pritcher was ordered to the "rebel world called Haven" in the strongest terms. 

Captain Han Pritcher, alone in his light one-man speedster, set his course quietly and calmly 
for Kalgan. He slept that night the sleep of a successfully stubborn man. 


13. LIEUTENANT AND CLOWN 

If, from a distance of seven thousand parsecs, the fall of Kalgan to the armies of the Mule had 
produced reverberations that had excited the curiosity of an old Trader, the apprehension of a 
dogged captain, and the annoyance of a meticulous mayor - to those on Kalgan itself, it 
produced nothing and excited no one. It is the invariable lesson to humanity that distance in 
time, and in space as well, lends focus. It is not recorded, incidentally, that the lesson has ever 
been permanently learned. 

Kalgan was - Kalgan. It alone of all that quadrant of the Galaxy seemed not to know that the 
Empire had fallen, that the Stannells no longer ruled, that greatness had departed, and peace 
had disappeared. 

Kalgan was the luxury world. With the edifice of mankind crumbling, it maintained its integrity as 
a producer of pleasure, a buyer of gold and a seller of leisure. 

It escaped the harsher vicissitudes of history, for what conqueror would destroy or even 
seriously damage a world so full of the ready cash that would buy immunity. 

Yet even Kalgan had finally become the headquarters of a warlord and its softness had been 
tempered to the exigencies of war. 

Its tamed jungles, its mildly modeled shores, and its garishly glamorous cities echoed to the 
march of imported mercenaries and impressed citizens. The worlds of its province had been 
armed and its money invested in battleships rather than bribes for the first time in its history. Its 
ruler proved beyond doubt that he was determined to defend what was his and eager to seize 
what was others. He was a great one of the Galaxy, a war and peace maker, a builder of 
Empire, an establisher of dynasty. 

And an unknown with a ridiculous nickname had taken him - and his arms - and his budding 
Empire - and had not even fought a battle. 

So Kalgan was as before, and its uniformed citizens hurried back to their older life, while the 
foreign professionals of war merged easily into the newer bands that descended. 

Again as always, there were the elaborate luxury hunts for the cultivated animal life of the 
jungles that never took human life; and the speedster bird-chases in the air above, that was 
fatal only to the Great Birds. 

In the cities, the escapers of the Galaxy could take their varieties of pleasure to suit their purse, 
from the ethereal sky-palaces of spectacle and fantasy that opened their doors to the masses 



at the jingle of half a credit, to the unmarked, unnoted haunts to which only those of great 
wealth were of the cognoscenti. 

To the vast flood, Toran and Bayta added not even a trickle. They registered their ship in the 
huge common hangar on the East Peninsula, and gravitated to that compromise of the 
middle-classes, the Inland Sea-where the pleasures were yet legal, and even respectable, and 
the crowds not yet beyond endurance. 

Bayta wore dark glasses against the light, and a thin, white robe against the heat. Warm-tinted 
arms, scarcely the goldener for the sun, clasped her knees to her, and she stared with firm, 
abstracted gaze at the length of her husband's outstretched body - almost shimmering in the 
brilliance of white sun-splendor. 

"Don't overdo it," she had said at first, but Toran was of a dying-red star, Despite three years of 
the Foundation, sunlight was a luxury, and for four days now his skin, treated beforehand for 
ray resistance, had not felt the harshness of clothing, except for the brief shorts. 

Bayta huddled close to him on the sand and they spoke in whispers. 

Toran's voice was gloomy, as it drifted upwards from a relaxed face, "No, I admit we're 
nowhere. But where is he? Who is he? This mad world says nothing of him. Perhaps he doesn't 
exist." 

"He exists," replied Bayta, with lips that didn't move. "He's clever, that's all. And your uncle is 
right. He's a man we could use - if there's time." 

A short pause. Toran whispered, "Know what I've been doing, Bay? I'm just daydreaming 
myself into a sun-stupor. Things figure themselves out so neatly - so sweetly." His voice nearly 
trailed off, then returned, "Remember the way Dr. Amann talked back at college, Bay. The 
Foundation can never lose, but that does not mean the rulers of the Foundation can't. Didn't the 
real history of the Foundation begin when Salvor Hardin kicked out the Encyclopedists and took 
over the planet Terminus as the first mayor? And then in the next century, didn't Hober Mallow 
gain power by methods almost as drastic? That's twice the rulers were defeated, so it can be 
done. So why not by us?" 

"It's the oldest argument in the books. Torie. What a waste of good reverie." 

"Is it? Follow it out. What's Haven? Isn't it part of the Foundation? If we become top dog, it's still 
the Foundation winning, and only the current rulers losing." 

"Lots of difference between 'we can' and 'we will.' You're just jabbering." 

Toran squirmed. "Nuts, Bay, you're just in one of your sour, green moods. What do you want to 
spoil my fun for? I'll just go to sleep if you don't mind." 

But Bayta was craning her head, and suddenly - quite a non sequitur - she giggled, and 
removed her glasses to look down the beach with only her palm shading her eyes. 

Toran looked up, then lifted and twisted his shoulders to follow her glance. 

Apparently, she was watching a spindly figure, feet in air, who teetered on his hands for the 



amusement of a haphazard crowd. It was one of the swarming acrobatic beggars of the shore, 
whose supple joints bent and snapped for the sake of the thrown coins. 

A beach guard was motioning him on his way and with a surprising one-handed balance, the 
clown brought a thumb to his nose in an upside-down gesture. The guard advanced 
threateningly and reeled backward with a foot in his stomach. The clown righted himself without 
interrupting the motion of the initial kick and was away, while the frothing guard was held off by 
a thoroughly unsympathetic crowd. 

The clown made his way raggedly down the beach. He brushed past many, hesitated often, 
stopped nowhere. The original crowd had dispersed. The guard had departed. 

"He's a queer fellow," said Bayta, with amusement, and Toran agreed indifferently. The clown 
was close enough now to be seen clearly. His thin face drew together in front into a nose of 
generous planes and fleshy tip that seemed all but prehensile. His long, lean limbs and spidery 
body, accentuated by his costume, moved easily and with grace, but with just a suggestion of 
having been thrown together at random. 

To look was to smile. 

The clown seemed suddenly aware of their regard, for he stopped after he had passed, and, 
with a sharp turn, approached. His large, brown eyes fastened upon Bayta. 

She found herself disconcerted. 

The clown smiled, but it only saddened his beaked face, and when he spoke it was with the 
soft, elaborate phrasing of the Central Sectors. 

"Were I to use the wits the good Spirits gave me," he said, "then I would say this lady can not 
exist - for what sane man would hold a dream to be reality. Yet rather would I not be sane and 
lend belief to charmed, enchanted eyes." 

Bayta's own eyes opened wide. She said, "Wow!" 

Toran laughed, "Oh, you enchantress. Go ahead, Bay, that deserves a five-credit piece. Let 
him have it." 

But the clown was forward with a jump. "No, my lady, mistake me not. I spoke for money not at 
all, but for bright eyes and sweet face." 

"Well, thanks," then, to Toran, "Golly, you think the sun's in his eyes?" 

"Yet not alone for eyes and face," babbled the clown, as his words hurled past each other in 
heightened frenzy, "but also for a mind, clear and sturdy - and kind as well." 

Toran rose to his feet, reached for the white robe he had crooked his arm about for four days, 
and slipped into it. 

"Now, bud," he said, "suppose you tell me what you want, and stop annoying the lady." 

The clown fell back a frightened step, his meager body cringing. "Now, sure I meant no harm. I 



am a stranger here, and it's been said I am of addled wits; yet there is something in a face that I 
can read. Behind this lady's fairness, there is a heart that's kind, and that would help me in my 
trouble for all I speak so boldly." 

"Will five credits cure your trouble?" said Toran, dryly, and held out the coin. 

But the clown did not move to take it, and Bayta said, "Let me talk to him, Torie," She added 
swiftly, and in an undertone, "There's no use being annoyed at his silly way of talking. That's 
just his dialect; and our speech is probably as strange to him." 

She said, "What is your trouble? You're not worried about the guard, are you? He won't bother 
you." 

"Oh, no, not he. He's but a windlet that blows the dust about my ankles. There is another that I 
flee, and he is a storm that sweeps the worlds aside and throws them plunging at each other. A 
week ago, I ran away, have slept in city streets, and hid in city crowds. I've looked in many 
faces for help in need. I find it here." He repeated the last phrase in softer, anxious tones, and 
his large eyes were troubled, "I find it here." 

"Now," said Bayta, reasonably, "I would like to help, but really, friend, I'm no protection against 
a world-sweeping storm. To be truthful about it, I could use-" 

There was an uplifted, powerful voice that bore down upon them. 

"Now, then, you mud-spawned rascal-" 

It was the beach guard, with a fire-red face, and snarling mouth, that approached at a run. He 
pointed with his low-power stun pistol. 

"Hold him, you two. Don't let him get away." His heavy hand fell upon the clown's thin shoulder, 
so that a whimper was squeezed out of him. 

Toran said, "What's he done?" 

"What's he done? What's he done? Well, now, that's good!" The guard reached inside the 
dangling pocket attached to his belt, and removed a purple handkerchief, with which he 
mopped his bare neck. He said with relish. "I'll tell you what he's done. He's run away. The 
word's all over Kalgan and I would have recognized him before this if he had been on his feet 
instead of on his hawkface top." And he rattled his prey in a fierce good humor. 

Bayta said with a smile, "Now where did he escape from, sir?" 

The guard raised his voice. A crowd was gathering, popeyed and jabbering, and with the 
increase of audience, the guard's sense of importance increased in direct ratio. 

"Where did he escape from?" he declaimed in high sarcasm. "Why, I suppose you've heard of 
the Mule, now." 

All jabbering stopped, and Bayta felt a sudden iciness trickle down into her stomach. The clown 
had eyes only for her-he still quivered in the guard's brawny grasp. 

"And who," continued the guard heavily, "would this infernal ragged piece be, but his lordship's 



own court fool who's run away." He jarred his captive with a massive shake, "Do you admit it, 
fool?" 


There was only white fear for answer, and the soundless sibilance of Bayta's voice close to 
Toran's ear. 

Toran stepped forward to the guard in friendly fashion, "Now, my man, suppose you take your 
hand away for just a while. This entertainer you hold has been dancing for us and has not yet 
danced out his fee." 

"Here!" The guard's voice rose in sudden concern. "There's a reward-" 

"You'll have it, if you can prove he's the man you want. Suppose you withdraw till then. You 
know that you're interfering with a guest, which could be serious for you." 

"But you're interfering with his lordship and that will be serious for you." He shook the clown 
once again. "Return the man's fee, carrion." 

Toran's hand moved quickly and the guard's stun pistol was wrenched away with half a finger 
nearly following it. The guard howled his pain and rage. Toran shoved him violently aside, and 
the clown, unhanded, scuttled behind him. 

The crowd, whose fringes were now lost to the eye, paid little attention to the latest 
development. There was among them a craning of necks, and a centrifugal motion as if many 
had decided to increase their distance from the center of activity. 

Then there was a bustle, and a rough order in the distance. A corridor formed itself and two 
men strode through, electric whips in careless readiness. Upon each purple blouse was 
designed an angular shaft of lightning with a splitting planet underneath. 

A dark giant, in lieutenant's uniform, followed them; dark of skin, and hair, and scowl. 

The dark man spoke with the dangerous softness that meant he had little need of shouting to 
enforce his whims. He said, "Are you the man who notified us?" 

The guard was still holding his wrenched hand, and with a pain-distorted face mumbled, "I 
claim the reward, your mightiness, and I accuse that man-" 

"You'll get your reward," said the lieutenant, without looking at him. He motioned curtly to his 
men, "Take him." 

Toran felt the clown tearing at his robe with a maddened grip. 

He raised his voice and kept it from shaking, "I'm sorry, lieutenant; this man is mine." 

The soldiers took the statement without blinking. One raised his whip casually, but the 
lieutenant's snapped order brought it down. 

His dark mightiness swung forward and planted his square body before Toran, "Who are you?" 
And the answer rang out, "A citizen of the Foundation." 



It worked-with the crowd, at any rate. The pent-up silence broke into an intense hum. The 
Mule's name might excite fear, but it was, after all, a new name and scarcely stuck as deeply in 
the vitals as the old one of the Foundation - that had destroyed the Empire - and the fear of 
which ruled a quadrant of the Galaxy with ruthless despotism. 

The lieutenant kept face. He said, "Are you aware of the identity of the man behind you?" 

"I have been told he's a runaway from the court of your leader, but my only sure knowledge is 
that he is a friend of mine. You'll need firm proof of his identity to take him." 

There were high-pitched sighs from the crowd, but the lieutenant let it pass. "Have you your 
papers of Foundation citizenship with you?" 

"At my ship." 

"You realize that your actions are illegal? I can have you shot." 

"Undoubtedly. But then you would have shot a Foundation citizen and it is quite likely that your 
body would be sent to the Foundation - quartered - as part compensation. It's been done by 
other warlords." 

The lieutenant wet his lips. The statement was true. 

He said, "Your name?" 

Toran followed up his advantage, "I will answer further questions at my ship. You can get the 
cell number at the Hangar; it is registered under the name 'Bayta'." 

"You won't give up the runaway?" 

"To the Mule, perhaps. Send your master!" 

The conversation had degenerated to a whisper and the lieutenant turned sharply away. 
"Disperse the crowd!" he said to his men, with suppressed ferocity. 

The electric whips rose and fell. There were shrieks and a vast surge of separation and flight. 

Toran interrupted his reverie only once on their way back to the Hangar. He said, almost to 
himself, "Galaxy, Bay, what a time I had! I was so scared-" 

"Yes," she said, with a voice that still shook, and eyes that still showed something akin to 
worship, "it was quite out of character." 

"Well, I still don't know what happened. I just got up there with a stun pistol that I wasn't even 
sure I knew how to use, and talked back to him. I don't know why I did it." 

He looked across the aisle of the short-run air vessel that was carrying them out of the beach 
area, to the seat on which the Mule's clown scrunched up in sleep, and added distastefully, "It 
was the hardest thing I've ever done." 

The lieutenant stood respectfully before the colonel of the garrison, and the colonel looked at 
him and said, "Well done. Your part's over now." 



But the lieutenant did not retire immediately. He said darkly, "The Mule has lost face before a 
mob, sir. It will be necessary to undertake disciplinary action to restore proper atmosphere of 
respect." 

"Those measures have already been taken." 

The lieutenant half turned, then, almost with resentment, "I'm willing to agree, sir, that orders 
are orders, but standing before that man with his stun pistol and swallowing his insolence 
whole, was the hardest thing I've ever done." 


14. THE MUTANT 

The "hangar" on Kalgan is an institution peculiar unto itself, born of the need for the disposition 
of the vast number of ships brought in by the visitors from abroad, and the simultaneous and 
consequent vast need for living accommodations for the same. The original bright one who had 
thought of the obvious solution had quickly become a millionaire. His heirs - by birth or finance 
- were easily among the richest on Kalgan. 

The "hangar" spreads fatly over square miles of territory, and "hangar" does not describe it at 
all sufficiently. It is essentially a hotel - for ships. The traveler pays in advance and his ship is 
awarded a berth from which it can take off into space at any desired moment. The visitor then 
lives in his ship as always. The ordinary hotel services such as the replacement of food and 
medical supplies at special rates, simple servicing of the ship itself, special intra-Kalgan 
transportation for a nominal sum are to be had, of course. 

As a result, the visitor combines hangar space and hotel bill into one, at a saving. The owners 
sell temporary use of ground space at ample profits. The government collects huge taxes. 
Everyone has fun. Nobody loses. Simple! 

The man who made his way down the shadow-borders of the wide corridors that connected the 
multitudinous wings of the "hangar" had in the past speculated on the novelty and usefulness of 
the system described above, but these were reflections for idle moments - distinctly unsuitable 
at present. 

The ships hulked in their height and breadth down the long lines of carefully aligned cells, and 
the man discarded line after line. He was an expert at what he was doing now and if his 
preliminary study of the hangar registry had failed to give specific information beyond the 
doubtful indication of a specific wing - one containing hundreds of ships - his specialized 
knowledge could winnow those hundreds into one. 

There was the ghost of a sigh in the silence, as the man stopped and faded down one of the 
lines; a crawling insect beneath the notice of the arrogant metal monsters that rested there. 

Here and there the sparkling of light from a porthole would indicate the presence of an early 
returner from the organized pleasures to simpler - or more private - pleasures of his own. 

The man halted, and would have smiled if he ever smiled. Certainly the convolutions of his 



brain performed the mental equivalent of a smile. 

The ship he stopped at was sleek and obviously fast. The peculiarity of its design was what he 
wanted. It was not a usual model - and these days most of the ships of this quadrant of the 
Galaxy either imitated Foundation design or were built by Foundation technicians. But this was 
special. This was a Foundation ship - if only because of the tiny bulges in the skin that were 
the nodes of the protective screen that only a Foundation ship could possess. There were other 
indications, too. 

The man felt no hesitation. 

The electronic barrier strung across the line of the ships as a concession to privacy on the part 
of the management was not at all important to him. It parted easily, and without activating the 
alarm, at the use of the very special neutralizing force he had at his disposal. 

So the first knowledge within the ship of the intruder without was the casual and almost friendly 
signal of the muted buzzer in the ship's living room that was the result of a palm placed over the 
little photocell just one side of the main air lock. 

And while that successful search went on, Toran and Bayta felt only the most precarious 
security within the steel walls of the Bayta. The Mule's clown who had reported that within his 
narrow compass of body he held the lordly name of Magnifico Giganticus, sat hunched over the 
table and gobbled at the food set before him. 

His sad, brown eyes lifted from his meat only to follow Bayta's movements in the combined 
kitchen and larder where he ate. 

"The thanks of a weak one are of but little value," he muttered, "but you have them, for truly, in 
this past week, little but scraps have come my way - and for all my body is small, yet is my 
appetite unseemly great." 

"Well, then, eat!" said Bayta, with a smile. "Don't waste your time on thanks. Isn't there a 
Central Galaxy proverb about gratitude that I once heard?" 

"Truly there is, my lady. For a wise man, I have been told, once said, 'Gratitude is best and 
most effective when it does not evaporate itself in empty phrases.' But alas, my lady, I am but a 
mass of empty phrases, it would seem. When my empty phrases pleased the Mule, it brought 
me a court dress, and a grand name - for, see you, it was originally simply Bobo, one that 
pleases him not - and then when my empty phrases pleased him not, it would bring upon my 
poor bones beatings and whippings." 

Toran entered from the pilot room, "Nothing to do now but wait, Bay. I hope the Mule is capable 
of understanding that a Foundation ship is Foundation territory." 

Magnifico Giganticus, once Bobo, opened his eyes wide and exclaimed, "How great is the 
Foundation before which even the cruel servants of the Mule tremble." 

"Have you heard of the Foundation, too?" asked Bayta, with a little smile. 

"And who has not?" Magnifico's voice was a mysterious whisper. "There are those who say it is 



a world of great magic, of fires that can consume planets, and secrets of mighty strength. They 
say that not the highest nobility of the Galaxy could achieve the honor and deference 
considered only the natural due of a simple man who could say 'I am a citizen of the 
Foundation,' - were he only a salvage miner of space, or a nothing like myself." 

Bayta said, "Now, Magnifico, you'll never finish if you make speeches. Here, I'll get you a little 
flavored milk. It's good." 

She placed a pitcher of it upon the table and motioned Toran out of the room. 

"Torie, what are we going to do now - about him?" and she motioned towards the kitchen. 

"How do you mean?" 

"If the Mule comes, are we going to give him up?" 

"Well, what else, Bay?" He sounded harassed, and the gesture with which he shoved back the 
moist curl upon his forehead testified to that. 

He continued impatiently, "Before I came here I had a sort of vague idea that all we had to do 
was to ask for the Mule, and then get down to business - just business, you know, nothing 
definite." 

"I know what you mean, Torie. I wasn't much hoping to see the Mule myself, but I did think we 