dropped melon. If it's the internal pressure, you'd be crushed to death in a microsecond.
         It takes ten minutes, more or less, to get depressur-ized, and another two or three to get
untangled and dressed. Not exactly something you can hop out of and come up fighting. Only four
people have any mobility while the rest of us are trapped in our shells; that's the Navy maintenance
crew. They essentially carry the whole acceleration chamber apparatus around with them, their suits
becoming twenty-ton vehicles. And even they have to remain in one place while the ship is
maneuvering.
         The accelerating was over at 2038. A green light went on and I chinned the button to
depressurize.
Marygay and I were getting dressed outside. The residual fumes from the pressurizing fluid made me
unpleasantly giddy and a little nauseous.
         "How'd that happen?" I pointed to an angry purple welt that ran from beneath her right breast
to the opposite hipbone.
         "That's the second time," she said, pinching the skin angrily. "The first one was on my rear—I
think that shell doesn't fit right, gets creases."
         "Maybe you've lost weight."
         "Wise guy."
         Our caloric intake and exercise had been rigorously monitored and controlled since suit-
fitting at Stargate. You can't use a fighting suit unless the sensor-skin inside fits like a film of oil.
         A wall speaker drowned out the rest of her comment. "Attention, all personnel. Attention. All
army personnel echelon 6 and above and all naval personnel echelon 4 and above will report to the-
briefing room at 2130. Attention—"
         It repeated the message twice. I went off to lie down for a few minutes while Marygay
showed her bruise— and all the rest of herself—to the medic and the armorer. For the record, I didn't
feel a bit jealous.

         The Commodore began the briefing. "There's not much to tell, and what there is, is not good
news.
"Six days ago, the Tauran vessel that is pursuing us released a drone missile. The initial acceleration
was on the order of eighty gravities." He paused.
         "After blasting for approximately a day, its acceleration suddenly jumped to 148 gravities."
Collective gasp.
         "Yesterday, it jumped again. 203 gravities. I shouldn't need to tell you that this is twice the
accelerabili-ty of the enemy drones in our last encounter.
         "We launched a salvo of drones, four of them, intersecting what the computer predicted to be
the four most probable future trajectories of the enemy drone. One of them paid off, very near, while
we were doing evasive maneuvers. We contacted and destroyed the Tauran weapon about ten million
kilometers from here."
         That was practically next door. "The only encouraging thing we learned from the encounter
was from spectral analysis of the blast. It was no more powerful than ones we have observed in the
past, so we might infer that at least their progress in explosives has not matched then- progress in
propulsion. Or perhaps they just didn't feel a more powerful blast to be necessary.
         "This is the first manifestation of a very important effect that has heretofore been of interest
only to theorists. Tell me, soldier," he pointed at Negulesco. "How long has it been since we first
fought the Taurans, at Aleph?"
         "That depends on your frame of reference," she answered dutifully. "To me, it's been about
eight months, Commodore."
         "Exactly. You've lost about nine years, though, to time dilation, while we maneuvered
between collapsar jumps. In an engineering sense, as we haven't done any important research and
development during that period, ... the enemy vessel comes from our future!" He stopped to let that
sink in.
        "As the war progresses, this can only become more and more pronounced. The Taurans don't
have any cure for relativity, though, so it will be to our benefit as often as to theirs.
        "For the present, however, it is we who are operating with a handicap. As the Tauran pursuit
vessel draws closer, this handicap will become more severe. They can simply outshoot us.
        "We're going to have to do some fancy dodging. When we get within five hundred million
kilometers of the enemy ship, everybody gets into his shell and we have to trust the logistic
computer. It will put us through a rapid series of random changes in direction and velocity.
        "I'll be blunt. As long as they have one more drone than we, they can finish us off. They
haven't launched | any more since that first one. Perhaps they are holding their fire" —he mopped
his forehead nervously— "or maybe they only had one. In that case, it's we who have them.
        "At any rate, all personnel will be required to be in their shells with no more than ten minutes'
notice. When we get within a thousand million kilometers of the enemy, you are to stand by your
shells. By the tune we are within five hundred million kilometers, you will be in them, and all shell
compounds will be flooded and pressurized. We cannot wait for anyone.
        "That's all I have to say. Sub-major?"
        "I'll speak to my people later, Commodore. Thank you."
        "Dismissed." And none of this "fuck you, sir" nonsense. The navy thought that was a bit
beneath their dignity. We stood at attention —all except Stott— until he had left the room. Then
some other swabbie said "dismissed" again, and we left.
        I went to the NCO room for some soya, company, and maybe a little information.
        There wasn't much happening but idle speculation, so I took Rogers and went off to bed.
Marygay had disappeared again, hopefully trying to wheedle something out of Singhe.

3
        We had our promised get-together with the sub-major the next morning, when he more or less
repeated what the commodore had said, in infantry terms and in his staccato monotone. He
emphasized the fact that all we knew about the Tauran ground forces was that if their naval capability
was unproved, it was likely they would be able to handle us better than last time.
        But that brings up an interesting point. Eight months or nine years before, we'd had a
tremendous advantage: they had seemed not quite to understand what was going on. As belligerent as
they has been in space, we'd expected them to be real Huns on the ground. Instead, they practically
lined themselves up for slaughter. One escaped and presumably described the idea of old-fashioned
in-fighting to his fellows.
        But that, of course, didn't mean that the word had necessarily gotten to this particular bunch,
the Taurans guarding Yod-4. The only way we know of to communicate faster than the speed of light
is to physically carry a message through successive collapsar jumps. And there was no way of telling
how many jumps there were between Yod-4 and the Tauran home base—so these might be just as
passive as the last bunch, or might have been practicing infantry tactics for most of a decade. We
would find out when we got there.
        The armorer and I were helping my squad pull maintenance on their fighting suits when we
passed the thousand million kilometer mark and had to go up to the shells.
        We had about five hours to kill before we had to get into our cocoons. I played a game of
chess with Rabi and lost. Then Rogers led the platoon in some vigorous calisthenics, probably for no
other reason than to get then" minds off the prospect of having to lie half-crushed in the shells for at
least four hours. The longest we'd gone before was half that.
        Ten minutes before the five hundred million kilometer mark, we squad leaders took over and
supervised buttoning everybody up. In eight minutes we were zipped and flooded and at the mercy of
—or safe in the arms of— the logistic computer.
        While I was lying there being squeezed, -a silly thought took hold of my brain and went round
and round like a charge in a superconductor: according to military formalism, the conduct of war
divides neatly into two categories, tactics and logistics. Logistics has to do with with moving the
troops and feeding them and just about everything except the actual fighting, which is tactics. And
now we're fighting, but we don't have a tactical computer to guide us through the attack and defense,
just a huge, super-efficient pacifistic cybernetic grocery clerk of a logistic, mark that word, logistic
computer.
        The other side of my brain, perhaps not quite as pinched, would argue that it doesn't matter
what name you give to a computer, it's a pile of memory crystals, logic banks, nuts and bolts ... If you
program it to be Ghengis Khan, it is a tactical computer, even if its usual function is to monitor the
stock market or control sewage conversion.
        But the other voice was obdurate and said by that kind of reasoning, a man is only a hank of
hair and a piece of bone and some stringy meat; no matter what kind of man he is, if you teach him
well, you can take a Zen monk and turn him into a slavering bloodthirsty warrior.
        Then what the hell are you, we, am I, answered the other side. A peace-loving, vacuum-
welding specialist cum physics teacher snatched up by the Elite Conscription Act and reprogrammed
to be a killing machine. You, I have killed and liked it
        But that was hypnotism, motivational conditioning, I argued back at myself. They don't do
that any more.
        And the only reason, I said, they don't do it is that they think you'll kill better without it.
That's logic.
        Speaking of logic, the original question was, why do they send a logistic computer to do a
man's job? Or something like that . . . and we were off again.
        The light blinked green and I chinned the switch automatically. The pressure was down to 1.3
before I realized that it meant we were alive, we had won the first skirmish. I was only partly right.

4
         I was belting on my tunic when my ring tingled and I held it up to listen. It was Rogers.
         "Mandella, go check squad bay 3. Something went wrong; Dalton had to depressurize it from
Control." Bay 5 —that was Marygay's squad! I rushed down the corridor in bare feet and got there
just as they opened the door from inside the pressure chamber and began straggling out.
         The first out was Bergman. I grabbed his arm. "What the hell is going on, Bergman?"
         "Huh?" He peered at me, still dazed, as everyone is when they come out of the chamber. "Oh,
s'you. Mandella. I dunno. Whad'ya mean?"
         I squinted in through the door, still holding on to him. "You were late, man, you
depressurized late. What happened?"
         He shook his head, trying to clear it. "Late? Whad' late. Uh, how late?"
         I looked at my watch for the first time. "Not too—" Jesus Christ. "Uh, we zipped in at 0520,
didn't we?" "Yeah, I think that's it."
         Still no Marygay among the dim figures picking their way through the ranked couches and
jumbled tubing. "Urn, you were only a couple of minutes late . . . but we were only supposed to be
under for four hours, maybe less. It's 1050."
         "Urn." He shook his head again. I let go of him and stood back to let Stiller and Demy
through the door. "Everybody's late, then," Bergman said. "So we aren't in any trouble."
         "Uh—" Non sequiturs. "Right; right—Hey, Stiller! You seen—"
         From inside: "Medic! MEDIC!" Somebody who wasn't Marygay was coming out. I pushed
her roughly out of my way and dove through the door, landed on somebody else and clambered over
to where Strove, Marygay*s assistant, was standing over a pod and talking very loud and fast into his
ring,
         "—and blood God yes we need—"
         It was Marygay still lying in her suit she was
         "—got the word from Dalton—"
        covered every square inch of her with a uniform bright sheen of blood
        "—when she didn't come out—"
        it started as an angry welt up by her collarbone and was just a welt as it traveled between her
breasts until it passed the sternum's support
        "—I came over and popped the—"
        and opened up into a cut that got deeper as it ran down over her belly and where it stopped
        "—yeah, she's still—"
        a few centimeters above the pubis a membraned loop of gut was protruding . . .
        "—OK, left hip. Mandella—"
        She was still alive, her heart palpitating, but her blood-streaked head lolled limply, eyes rolled
back to white slits, bubbles of red froth appearing and popping at the corner of her mouth each time
she exhaled shallowly.
        "—tattoed on her left hip. Mandella! Snap out of it! Reach under her and find out what her
blood—"
        "TYPE O RH NEGATIVE GOD damn ... it Sorry—Oh negative." Hadn't I seen that tattoo ten
thousand times?
        Struve passed this information on and I suddenly remembered the first-aid kit on my belt,
snapped it off and fumbled through it.
        Stop the bleeding—protect the wound—treat for shock, that's what the book said. Forgot one,
forgot one . . . clear air passages.
        She was breathing, if that's what they meant. How do you stop the bleeding or protect the
wound with one measly pressure bandage when the wound is nearly a meter long? Treat for shock,
that I could do. I fished out the green ampoule, laid it against her arm and pushed the button. Then I
laid the sterile side of the bandage gently on top of the exposed intestine and passed the elastic strip
under the small of her back, adjusted it for nearly zero tension and fastened it
        "Anything else you can do?" Struve asked.
        I stood back and felt helpless. "I don't know. Can you think of anything?"
        "I'm no more a medic that you are." Looking up at the door, he kneaded a fist, biceps
straining. "Where the hell are they? You have morph-plex in that kit?"
        "Yeah, but somebody told me not to use it for internal—"
        "William?"
        Her eyes were open and she was trying to lift her head. I rushed over and held her. "It'll be all
right, Mary-gay. The medic's coming."
        "What . . . all right? I'm thirsty. Water."
        "No, honey, you can't have any water. Not for a while, anyhow." Not if she was headed for
surgery.
        "Why is all the blood?" she said in a small voice. Her head rolled back. "Been a bad girl."
        "It must have been the suit," I said rapidly. "Remember earlier, the creases?"
        She shook her head. "Suit?" She turned suddenly paler and retched weakly. Water . . .
William, please."
        Authoritative voice behind me: "Get a sponge or a cloth soaked in water." I looked around
and saw Doc Wilson with two stretcher bearers.
        "First half-liter femoral," he said to no one in particular as he carefully peeked under the
pressure bandage. "Follow that relief tube down a couple of meters and pinch it off. Find out if she's
passed any blood."
        One of the medics ran a ten-centimeter needle into Marygay's thigh and started giving her
whole blood from a plastic bag.
        "Sorry I'm late," Doc Wilson said tiredly. "Business is booming. What'd you say about the
suit?"
        "She had two minor injuries before. Suit doesn't fit quite right, creases up under pressure."
         He nodded absently, checking her blood pressure. "You, anybody, give—" Somebody handed
him a paper towel dripping water. "Uh, give her any medication?"
         "One ampoule of No-shock."
         He wadded the paper towel up loosely and put it in Marygay's hand. "What's her name?" I
told him.
         "Marygay, we can't give you a drink of water but you can suck on this. Now I'm going to
shine a bright light in your eye." While he was looking through her pupil with a metal tube, he said,
"Temperature?" and one of the medics read a number from a digital readout box and withdrew a
probe. "Passed blood?"
         "Yes. Some."
         He put his hand lightly on the pressure bandage. "Marygay, can you roll over a little on your
right side?"
         "Yes," she said slowly, and put her elbow down for leverage. "No," she said and started
crying.
         "Now, now," he said absently and pushed up on her hip just enough to be able to see her back.
"Only the one wound," he muttered. "Hell of a lot of blood."
         He pressed the side of his ring twice and shook it by his ear. "Anybody up in the shop?"
         "Harrison, unless he's on a call."
         A woman walked up, and at first I didn't recognize her, pale and disheveled, bloodstained
tunic. It was Estelle Harmony.
         Doc Wilson looked up. "Any new customers, Doctor Harmony?"
         "No," she said dully. "The maintenance man was a double traumatic amputation. Only lived a
few minutes. We're keeping him running for transplants."
         "All those others?"
         "Explosive decompression." She sniffed. "Anything I can do here?"
         "Yeah, just a minute." He tried his ring again. "God damn it. You don't know where Harrison
is?"
         "No . . . well, maybe, he might be in Surgery B if there was trouble with the cadaver
maintenance. Think I set it up all right, though."
         "Yeah, well, hell you know how . . ."
         "Mark!" said the medic with the blood bag.
         "One more half-liter femoral," Doc Wilson said. "Estelle, you mind taking over for one of the
medics here, prepare this gal for surgery?"
         "No, keep me busy."
         "Good—Hopkins, go up to the shop and bring down a roller and a liter, uh, two liters isotonic
fluorocarb with the primary spectrum. If they're Merck they'll say 'abdominal spectrum.' " He found a
part of his sleeve with no blood on it and wiped his forehead. "If you find Harrison, send him over to
surgery A and have him set up the anesthetic sequence for abdominal."
         "And bring her up to A ?"
         "Right. If you can't find Harrison, get somebody"— he stabbed a finger in my direction—"this
guy, to roll the patient up to A; you run ahead and start the sequence."
         He picked up his bag and looked through it. "We could start the sequence here," he muttered.
"But hell, not with paramethadone—Marygay? How do you feel?"
         She was still crying. "I'm . . . hurt."
         "I know," he said gently. He thought for a second and said to Estelle, "No way to tell really
how much blood she lost. She may have been passing it under pressure. Also there's some pooling in
the abdominal cavity. Since she's still alive I don't think she could've bled under pressure for very
long. Hope no brain damage yet."
         He touched the digital readout attached to Marygay"s arm. "Monitor the blood pressure, and if
you think it's indicated, give her five cc's vasoconstrictor. I've gotta go scrub down."
         He closed his bag. "You have any vasoconstrictor besides the pneumatic ampoule?"
         Estelle checked her own bag. "No, just the emergency pneumatic ... uh ... yes, I've got
controlled dosage on the 'dilator, though."
         "OK, if you have to use the 'constrictor and her pressure goes up too fast—"
         "I'll give her vasodilator two cc's at a time."
         "Check. Hell of a way to run things, but. . . well. If you're not too tired, I'd like you to stand by
me upstairs."
         "Sure." Doc Wilson nodded and left
         Estelle began sponging Marygay's belly with isopro-pyl alcohol. It smelled cold and clean.
"Somebody gave her No-shock?"
         "Yes," I said, "about ten minutes ago." "Ah. That's why the Doc was worried—no, you did the
right thing. But No-shock's got some vasoconstrictor. Five cc's more might run up an overdose." She
continued silently scrubbing, her eyes coming up every few seconds to check the blood pressure
monitor.
         "William?" It was the first time she'd shown any sign of knowing me. "This worn—, uh,
Marygay, she's your lover? Your regular lover?"
         "That's right"
         "She's very pretty." A remarkable observation, her body torn and caked with crusting blood,
her face smeared where I had tried to wipe away the tears. I suppose a doctor or a woman or a lover
can look beneath f that and see beauty.
         "Yes, she is." She had stopped crying and had her eyes squeezed shut, sucking the last bit of
moisture from the paper wad.
         "Can she have some more water?"
         "OK, same as before. Not too much."
         I went out to the locker alcove and into the head for a paper towel. Now that the fumes from
the pressurizing fluid had cleared, I could smell the air. It smelled wrong. Light machine oil and
burnt metal, like the smell of a metalworking shop. I wondered whether they had overloaded the
airco. That had happened once before, after the first time we'd used the acceleration chambers.
         Marygay took the water without opening her eyes.
         "Do you plan to stay together when you get back to Earth?"
         "Probably," I said. "/f we get back to Earth. Still one more battle."
         "There won't be any more battles," she said flatly. "You mean you haven't heard?"
         "What?" '
         "Don't you know the ship was hit?"
         "Hit!" Then how could any of us be alive?
         "That's right." She went back to her scrubbing. "Four squad bays. Also the armor bay. There
isn't a fighting suit left on the ship . . . and we can't fight in our underwear."
         "What—squad bays, what happened to the people?"
         "No survivors."
         Thirty people. "Who was it?"
         "All of the third platoon. First squad of the second platoon."
         Al-Sadat, Busia, Maxwell, Negulesco. "My God."
         "Thirty deaders, and they don't have the slightest notion of what caused it. Don't know but
that it may happen again any minute."
         "It wasn't a drone?"
         "No, we got all of their drones. Got the enemy vessel, too. Nothing showed up on any of the
sensors, just blam! and a third of the ship was torn to hell. We were lucky it wasn't the drive or the
life support system." I was hardly hearing her. Penworth, LaBatt, Smithers. Christine and Frida. All
dead. I was numb.
         She took a blade-type razor and a tube of gel out of her bag. "Be a gentleman and look the
other way," she said. "Oh, here." She soaked a square of gauze in alcohol and handed it to me. "Be
useful. Do her face."
        I started and, without opening her eyes, Marygay said, "That feels good. What are you
doing?"
        "Being a gentleman. And useful, too—"
        "All personnel, attention, all personnel." There wasn't a squawk-box in the pressure chamber,
but I could hear it clearly through the door to the locker alcove. "All personnel echelon 6 and above,
unless directly involved in medical or maintenance emergencies, report immediately to the assembly
area."
        "I've got to go, Marygay."
        She didn't say anything. I didn't know whether she had heard the announcement.
        "Estelle," I addressed her directly, gentleman be damned. "Will you—"
        "Yes. I'll let you know as soon as we can tell."
        "Well."
        "It's going to be all right." But her expression was grim and worried. "Now get going," she
said, softly.
        By the time I picked my way out into the corridor, the 'box was repeating the message for the
fourth time. There was a new smell in the air, that I didn't want to identify.

5
        Halfway to the assembly area I realized what a mess I was, and ducked into the head by the
NCO lounge. Corporal Kamehameha was hurriedly brushing her hair.
        "William! What happened to you?"
        "Nothing." I turned on a tap and looked at myself in the mirror. Dried blood smeared all over
my face and tunic. "It was Marygay, Corporal Potter, her suit . . ". well, evidently it got a crease, uh. .
."
        "Dead?"
        "No, just badly, uh, she's going into surgery—"
        "Don't use hot water. You'll just set the stain?'
        "Oh. Right" I used the hot to wash my face and hand, dabbed at the tunic with cold. "Your
squad's just two bays down from Al's, isn't it?"
        "Yes."
        "Did you see what happened?"
        "No. Yes. Not when it happened." For the first time I noticed that she was crying, big tears
rolling down her cheeks and off her chin. Her voice was even, controlled. She pulled at her hair
savagely. "It's a mess."
        I stepped over and put my hand on her shoulder. "DON'T touch me!" she flared and knocked
my hand off with the brush. "Sorry. Let's go."
        At the door to the head she touched me lightly on the arm. "William . . ." She looked at me
defiantly. "I'm just glad it wasn't me. You understand? That's the only way you can look at it."
        I understood, but I didn't know that I believed her.

         "I can sum it up very briefly," the commodore said in a tight voice, "if only because we know
so little.
         "Some ten seconds after we destroyed the enemy vessel, two objects, very small objects,
struck the Anniversary amidships. By inference, since they were not detected and we know the limits
of our detection apparatus, we know that they were moving in excess of nine-tenths of the speed of
light That is to say, more precisely, their velocity vector normal to the axis of the Anniversary was
greater than nine-tenths of the speed of light. They slipped in behind the repeller fields."
         When the Anniversary is moving at relativistic speeds, it is designed to generate two powerful
electromagnetic fields, one centered about five thousand kilometers from the ship and the other about
ten thousand klicks away, both in line with the direction of motion of the ship. These fields are
maintained by a "ramjet" effect, energy picked up from interstellar gas as we mosey along.
        Anything big enough to worry about hitting (that is, anything big enough to see with a strong
magnifying glass) goes through the first field and comes out with a very strong negative charge all
over its surface. As it enters the second field, it's repelled away from the path of the ship. If the object
is too big to be pushed around this wav, we can sense it at a greater distance and maneuver out of its
way.
        "I shouldn't have to emphasize how formidable a weapon this is. When the Anniversary was
struck, our rate of speed with respect to the enemy was such that we traveled our own length every
ten-thousandth of a second. Further, we were jerking around erratically with a constantly changing
and purely random lateral acceleration. Thus the objects that struck us must have been guided, not
aimed. And the guidance system was self-contained, since there were no Taurans alive at the time
they struck us. All of this in a package no larger than a small pebble.
        "Most of you are too young to remember the term future shock. Back in the seventies, some
people felt that technological progress was so rapid that people, normal people, couldn't cope with it;
that they wouldn't have time to get used to the present before the future was upon them. A man
named Toffler coined the term future shock to describe this situation." The commodore could get
pretty academic.
        "We're caught up in a physical situation that resembles this scholarly concept. The result has
been disaster. Tragedy. And, as we discussed in our last meeting, there is no way to counter it.
Relativity traps us in the enemy's past; relativity brings them from our future. We can only hope that
next time, the situation will be reversed. And all we can do to help bring that about is try to get back
to Stargate, and then to Earth, where specialists may be able to deduce something, some sort of
counterweapon, from the nature of the damage.
        "Now we could attack the Tauran's portal planet from space and perhaps destroy the base
without using you infantry. But I think there would be a very great risk involved. We might be ... shot
down by whatever hit us today, and never return to Stargate with what I consider to be vital
information. We could send a drone with a message detailing our assumptions about this new enemy
weapon . . . but that might be inadequate. And the Force would be that much further behind,
technologically.
        "Accordingly, we have set a course that will take us around Yod-4, keeping the collapsar as
much as possible between us and the Tauran base. We will avoid contact with the enemy and return
to Stargate as quickly as possible."
        Incredibly, the Commodore sat down and kneaded his temples. "All of you are at least squad
or section leaders. Most of you have good combat records. And I hope that some of you will be
rejoining the Force after your two years are up. Those of you who do will probably be made
lieutenants, and face your first real command.
        "It is to these people I would like to speak for a few moments, not as your ... as one of your
commanders, but just as a senior officer and advisor.
        "One cannot make command decisions simply by assessing the tactical situation and going
ahead with whatever course of action will do the most harm to the enemy with a minimum of death
and damage to your own men and materiel. Modern warfare has become very complex, especially
during the last century. Wars are won not by a simple series of battles won, but by a complex
interrelationship among military victory, economic pressures, logistic maneuvering, access to the
enemy's information, political postures—dozens, literally dozens of factors."
        I was hearing this, but the only thing that was getting through to my brain was that a third of
our friends' lives had been snuffed out less than an hour before, and he was sitting up there giving us
a lecture on military theory-
        "So sometimes you have to throw away a battle in order to help win the war. This is exactly
what we are going to do.
        "This was not an easy decision. In fact, it was probably the hardest decision of my military
career. Because, on the surface at least, it may look like cowardice.
        "The logistic computer calculates that we have about a 62 percent chance of success, should
we attempt to destroy the enemy base. Unfortunately, we would have only a 30 percent chance of
survival— as some of the scenarios leading to success involve ramming the portal planet with the
Anniversary at light speed." Jesus Christ.
        "I hope none of you ever has to face such a decision. When we get back to Stargate, I will in
all probability be court-martialed for cowardice under fire. But I honestly believe that the information
that may be gained from analysis of the damage to the Anniversary is more important then the
destruction of this one Tauran base." He sat up straight "More important than one soldier's career."
        I had to stifle an impulse to laugh. Surely "cowardice" had nothing to do with his decision.
Surely he had nothing so primitive and unmilitary as a will to live.

        The maintenance crew managed to patch up the huge rip in the side of the Anniversary and to
repressurize that section. We spent the rest of the day cleaning up me area; without, of course,
disturbing any of the precious evidence for which the Commodore was willing to sacrifice his career.
        The hardest part was jettisoning the bodies. It wasn't so bad except for the ones whose suits
had burst.

        I went to Estelle's cabin the next day, as soon as she was off duty.
        "It wouldn't serve any good purpose for you to see her now." Estelle sipped her drink, a
mixture of ethyl alcohol, citric acid and water, with a drop of some ester that approximated the aroma
of orange rind.
        "Is she out of danger?"
        "Not for a couple of weeks. Let me explain." She set down her drink and rested her chin on
interlaced fingers. "This sort of injury would be fairly routine under normal circumstances. Having
replaced the lost blood, we'd simply sprinkle some magic powder into her abdominal cavity and paste
her back up. Have her hobbling around in a couple of days.
        "But there are complications. Nobody's ever been injured in a pressure suit before. So far,
nothing really unusual has cropped up. But we want to monitor her innards very closely for the next
few days.
        "Also, we were very concerned about peritonitis. You know what peritonitis is?"
        "Yes." Well, vaguely.
        "Because a part of her intestine had ruptured under pressure. We didn't want to settle for
normal prophylaxis because a lot of the, uh, contamination had impacted on the peritoneum under
pressure. To play it safe, we completely sterilized the whole shebang, the abdominal cavity and her
entire digestive system from the duodenum south. Then, of course, we had to replace all of her
normal intestinal flora, now dead, with a commercially prepared culture. Still standard procedure, but
not normally called for unless the damage is more severe."
        "I see." And it was making me a little queasy. Doctors don't seem to realize that most of us
are perfectly content not having to visualize ourselves as animated bags of skin filled with obscene
glop.
"This in itself is enough reason not to see her for a couple of days. The changeover of intestinal flora
has a pretty violent effect on the digestive system—not dangerous, since she's under constant
observation. But tiring and, well, embarrassing.
        "With all of this, she would be completely out of danger if this were a normal clinical
situation. But we're decelerating at a constant 1-1/2 gees, and her internal organs have gone through a
lot of jumping around. You might as well know that if we do any blasting, anything over about two
gees, she's going to die."
        "But. . . but we're bound to go over two on the final approach! What—"
        "I know, I know. But that won't be for a couple of weeks. Hopefully, she will have mended by
then.
        "William, face it. It's a miracle she survived to get into surgery. So there's a big chance she
won't make it back to Earth. It's sad; she's a special person, the special person to you, maybe. But
we've had so much death . . . you ought to be getting used to it, come to terms with it."
        I took a long pull at my drink, identical to hers except for the citric acid. "You're getting
pretty hard-boiled."
        "Maybe . . . no. Just realistic. I have a feeling we're headed for a lot more death and sorrow."
        "Not me. As soon as we get to Stargate, I'm a civilian."
        "Don't be so sure." The old familiar argument. "Those clowns who signed us up for two years
can just as easily make it four or—"
        "Or six or twenty or the duration. But they won't. It would be mutiny."
        "I don't know. If they could condition us to kill on cue, they can condition us to do almost
anything. Re-enlist."
        That was a chiller.
        Later on we tried to make love, but both of us had too much to think about

        I got to see Marygay for the first time about a week later. She was wan, had lost a lot of
weight and seemed very confused. Doc Wilson assured me that it was just the medication; they hadn't
seen any evidence of brain damage.
        She was still in bed, still being fed through a tube. I began to get very nervous about the
calendar. Every day there seemed to be some improvement, but if she was still in bed when we hit
that collapsar push, she wouldn't have a chance. I couldn't get any encouragement from Doc Wilson
or Estelle; they said it depended on Mary-gay's resilience.
        The day before the push, they transferred her from bed to Estelle's acceleration couch in the
infirmary. She was lucid and was taking food orally, but she still couldn't move under her own
power, not at 1-1/2 gees.
        I went to see her. "Heard about the course change? We have to go through Aleph-9 to get
back to Tet-38. Four more months on this damn hulk. But another six years' combat pay when we get
back to Earth."
        "That's good."
        "Ah, just think of the great things we'll—"
        "William."
        I let it trail off. Never could lie.
        "Don't try to jolly me. Tell me about vacuum welding, about your childhood, anything. Just
don't bullshit me about getting back to Earth." She turned her face to the wall.
        "I heard the doctors talking out in the corridor, one morning when they thought I was asleep.
But it just confirmed what I already knew, the way everybody'd been moping around.
        "So tell me, you were born in New Mexico in 1975. What then? Did you stay in New
Mexico? Were you bright in school? Have any friends, or were you too bright like me? How old
were you when you first got
sacked?"
        We talked in this vein for a while, uncomfortable. An dea came to me while we were
rambling, and when I ieft Marygay I went straight to Dr. Wilson.

        "We're giving her a fifty-fifty chance, but that's pretty arbitrary. None of the published data on
this sort of thing really fits."
        "But it is safe to say that her chances of survival are better, the less acceleration she has to
endure."
         "Certainly. For what it's worth. The commodore's going to take it as gently as possible, but
that'll still be four or five gees. Three might even be too much; we won't know until it's over."
         I nodded impatiently. "Yes, but I think there's a way to expose her to less acceleration than the
rest of us."
         "If you've developed an acceleration shield," he said smiling, "you better hurry and file a
patent. You could sell it for a considerable—"
         "No, Doc, it wouldn't be worth much under normal conditions; our shells work better and
they evolved from the same principles."
         "Explain away."
         "We put Marygay into a shell and flood—"
         "Wait, wait. Absolutely not. A poorly-fitting shell was what caused this in the first place. And
this time, she'd have to use somebody else's."
         "I know, Doc, let me explain. It doesn't have to fit her exactly as long as the life support
hookups can function. The shell won't be pressurized on the inside; it won't have to be because she
won't be subjected to those thousands of kilograms-per-square-centimeter pressure from the fluid
outside." "I'm not sure I follow."        "It's just an adaptation of—you've studied physics, haven't
you?"
         "A little bit, in medical school. My worst courses, after Latin."
         "Do you remember the principle of equivalence?" "I remember there was something by"That
name. Something to do with relativity, right?"
         "Uh-huh. It means that . . . there's no difference being in a gravitational field and being in an
equivalent accelerated frame of—it means that when the Anniversary is blasting five gees, the effect
on us is the same as if it were sitting on its tail on a big planet, on one with five gees' surface
gravity."
         "Seems obvious."
         "Maybe it is. It means that there's no experiment you could perform on the ship that could tell
you whether you were blasting or just sitting on a big planet."
         "Sure there is. You could turn off the engines, and if—"
         "Or you could look outside, sure; I mean isolated, physics-lab type experiments."
         "All right. I'll accept that. So?"
         "You know Archimedes' Law?"
         "Sure, the fake crown —that's what always got me about physics, they make a big to-do about
obvious things, and when it gets to the rough parts—"
         "Archimedes' Law says that when you immerse something in a fluid, it's buoyed up by a
force equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces."
         "That's reasonable."
         "And that holds, no matter what kind of gravitation or acceleration you're in —In a ship
blasting at five gees, the water displaced, if it's water, weighs five times as much as regular water, at
one gee."
         "Sure."
         "So if you float somebody in the middle of a tank of water, so that she's weightless, she'll still
be weightless when the ship is doing five gees."
         "Hold on, son. You had me going there, but it won't work."
         "Why not?" I was tempted to tell him to stick to his pills and stethoscopes and let me handle
the physics, but it was a good thing I didn't.
         "What happens when you drop a wrench in a submarine?"
         "Submarine?"
         "That's right. They work by Archimedes'—"
         "Ouch! You're right. Jesus. Hadn't thought it through."
         "That wrench falls right to the floor just as if the submarine weren't weightless." He looked
off into space, tapping a pencil on the desk. "What you describe is similar to the way we treat patients
with severe skin damage, like burns, on Earth. But it doesn't give any support to the internal organs,
the way the acceleration shells do, so it wouldn't do Marygay any good. . . ."
        I stood up to go. "Sorry I wasted—"
        "Hold on there, though, just a minute. We might be able to use your idea part-way."
        "How do you mean?"
        "I wasn't thinking it through, either. The way we normally use the shells is out of the question
for Marygay, of course." I didn't like to think about it. Takes a lot of hypno-conditioning to lie there
and have oxygenated fluorocarbon forced into every natural body orifice and one artificial one. I
fingered the valve fitting imbedded above my hipbone.
        "Yeah, that's obvious, it'd tear her —say . . . you mean, low pressure—"
        "That's right. We wouldn't need thousands of atmospheres to protect her against five gees'
straight-line acceleration; that's only for all the swerving and dodging —I'm going to call Maintenace.
Get down to your squad bay; that's the one we'll use. Dalton'll meet you there."

        Five minutes before injection into the collapsar field, and I started the flooding sequence.
Marygay and I were the only ones in shells; my presence wasn't really vital since the flooding and
emptying could be done by Control. But it was safer to have redundancy in the system and besides, I
wanted to be there.
        It wasn't nearly as bad as the normal routine; none of the crushing-bloating sensation. You
were just suddenly filled with the plastic-smelling stuff (you never perceived the first moments, when
it rushed in to replace the air in your lungs), and then there was a slight acceleration, and then you
were breathing air again, waiting for the shell to pop; then unplugging and unzipping and climbing
out—
        Marygay's shell was empty. I walked over to it and saw blood.
        "She hemorrhaged." Doc Wilson's voice echoed sepul-chrally. I turned, eyes stinging, and
saw him leaning in the door to the locker alcove. He was unaccountably, horribly, smiling.
        "Which was expected. Doctor Harmony's taking care of it. She'll be just fine."

6
        Marygay was walking in another week, "confraterniz-ing" in two, and pronounced completely
healed in six.
        Ten long months in space and it was army, army, army all the way. Calisthenics, meaningless
work details, compulsory lectures—there was even talk they were going to reinstate the sleeping
roster we'd had in basic, but they never did, probably out of fear of mutiny. A random partner every
night wouldn't have set too well with those of us who'd established more-or-less permanent pairs.
        All this crap, this insistence on military discipline, bothered me mainly because I was afraid it
meant they weren't going to let us out. Marygay said I was being paranoid; they only did it because
there was no other way to maintain order for ten months.
        Most of the talk, besides the usual bitching about the army, was speculation about how much
Earth would have changed and what we would do when we got out We'd be fairly rich: twenty-six
years' salary all at once. Compound interest, too; the $500 we'd been paid for our first month in the
army had grown to over $1500.
        We arrived at Stargate in late 2023, Greenwich date.

        The base had grown astonishingly in the nearly seventeen years we had been on the Yod-4
campaign. It was one building the size of Tycho City, housing nearly ten thousand. There were
seventy-eight cruisers, the size of the Anniversary or larger, involved in raids on Tauran-held portal
planets. Another ten guarded Stargate itself, and two were in orbit waiting for their infantry and crew
to be outprocessed. One other ship, the Earth's Hope II, had returned from fighting and had been
waiting at Stargate for another cruiser to return.
        They had lost two-thirds of their crew, and it was just not economical to send a cruiser back
to Earth with only thirty-nine people aboard. Thirty-nine confirmed civilians.
        We went planetside in two scoutships.

7
        General Botsford (who had been only a major when we'd first met him on Charon, when it
was only two huts and twenty-four graves) received us in an elegantly-appointed seminar room. He
was pacing back and forth at the end of the room, in front of a huge holographic operations cube.
        I could barely make out the labels and was astonished to see how far away Yod-4 had been —
but of course distance isn't important with the collapsar jump. It'd take us ten times as long to get to
Alpha Cen-tauri, which was practically next door but, of course, isn't a collapsar.
        "You know—" he said, too loudly, and then more conversationally: "You know that we could
disperse you into other strike forces and send you right out again. The Elite Conscription Act has
been changed now, extended, five years' subjective service instead of two.
        "We aren't doing that, but—damn it!—I don't see why some of you don't want to stay in.
Another couple of years and compound interest would make you wealthy for life. Sure, you took
heavy losses ... but that was inevitable; you were the first. Things are going to be easier now. The
fighting suits have been improved, we know more about the Taurans' tactics, our weapons are more
effective. . . .There's no need to be afraid."
        He sat down at the head of our table and looked down the long axis of it, seeing nobody. "My
own memories of combat are over a half-century old. To me it was exhilarating, strengthening. I must
be a different kind of person than all of you."
        Or have a very selective memory, I thought.
        "But that's neither here nor there. I have an alternative to offer you, one that doesn't involve
direct combat.
        "We're very short of qualified instructors. You might even say we don't have any—because,
ideally, the army would like for all of its instructors in the combat arts to be combat veterans.
        "You people were taught by veterans of Vietnam and Sinai, the youngest of whom were in
their forties when you left Earth. Twenty-six years ago. So we need you and are willing to pay.
        "The force will offer any of you a lieutenancy if you will accept a training position. It can be
on Earth, on the moon at double pay, on Charon at triple pay, or here at Stargate for quadruple pay.
Furthermore, you don't have to make up your mind now. You're all getting a free trip back to Earth
—I envy you. I haven't been back in twenty years, will probably never get back — and you can get
the feel of being a civilian again. If you don't like it, just walk into any UNEF installation and you'll
walk out an officer. Your choice of assignment.
        "Some of you are smiling. I think you ought to reserve judgment. Earth is not the same place
you left."
        He pulled a little card out of his tunic and looked at it, half-smiling. "Most of you have on the
order of four hundred thousand dollars coming to you, accumulated pay and interest. But Earth is on
a war footing and, of course, it is the citizens of Earth who are supporting the war with their tax
dollars. Your income puts you in a 92 percent income tax bracket. Thirty-two thousand dollars could
last you about three years if you're very careful.
        "Eventually you're going to have to get a job, and this is one job for which you are uniquely
trained. There aren't that many others available—the population of Earth is over nine billion, with
five or six billion unemployed. And all of your training is twenty-six years out of date.
        "Also keep in mind that your friends and sweethearts of two years ago are now going to be
twenty-six years older than you. Many of your relatives will have passed away. I think you'll find it a
very lonely world.
        "But to tell you more about this world, I'm going to turn you over to Sergeant Siri, who just
arrived from Earth. Sergeant?"
        "Thank you, General." It looked as if there was something wrong with his skin, his face; and
then I realized he was wearing face powder and lipstick. His nails were smooth white almonds.
        "I don't know where to begin." He sucked in his upper lip and looked at us, frowning. "Things
have changed so very much since I was a boy.
        "I'm twenty-three, so I wasn't even born when you people left for Aleph. . . . Well, for starts,
how many of you are homosexual?" Nobody. "That doesn't really surprise me. I am, though"—no
kidding— "and I guess about a third of everybody in Europe and North America is. Even more in
India and the Middle East. Less in South America and China.
        "Most governments encourage homosexuality—the United Nations is officially neutral—they
encourage it mainly because homolife is the one sure method of birth control."
        That sounded specious to me. In the army they freeze-dry and file a sperm sample and then
vasectomize you. Pretty foolproof.
        When I was going to school, a lot of the homosexuals on campus were using that argument.
And maybe it was working, after a fashion. I'd expected Earth to have a lot more than nine billion
people.
"When they told me, back on Earth, I was going to be talking to some of you I did some research,
mainly reading old 'faxes and magazines.
        "A lot of the things you were afraid were going to happen, didn't. Hunger, for instance. Even
without using all of our arable land and sea, we manage to feed everybody and could handle twice as
many. Food technology and impartial distribution of calories —when you left Earth there were
millions of people slowly starving to death. Now there are none.
        "You were concerned about crime. I read that you couldn't walk the streets of New York City
or London or Hong Kong without a bodyguard. But with everybody better educated and better cared
for, with psychometry so advanced that we can spot a potential criminal at the age of six —and give
him corrective therapy that works — well, serious crime has been on the decline for twenty years.
We probably have fewer serious crimes in the whole world than you used to have in one large—"
        "This is all well and good," the General broke in gruffly, making clear that it was neither, "but
it doesn't completely mesh with what I've heard. What do you call serious crime? What about the
rest?"
        "Oh, murder, assault, rape; all the serious crimes against one's person, all are down. Crimes
against property—petty theft, vandalism, illegal residence—these are still—"
        "What the hell is 'illegal residence'?"
        Sergeant Siri hesitated and then said primly: "One certainly shouldn't deprive others of living
space by illegally acquiring property."
        Alexandrov raised his hand. "You mean there's no such thing as private ownership of
property?"
        "Of course there is. I ... I owned my own rooms before I was drafted." For some reason the
topic seemed to embarrass him. New taboos? "But there are limits."
        Luthuli: "What do you do to criminals? Serious ones, I mean. Do you still brainwipe
murderers?"
        He was visibly relieved to change the subject. "Oh, no. That's considered very primitive.
Barbaric. We imprint a new, healthy personality on them; then they are repattemed and society
absorbs them without prejudice. It works very well."
        "Are there jails, prisons?" Yukawa asked.
        "I suppose you could call a correction center a jail. Until they have therapy and are released,
people are held there against their will. But you could say it was a malfunction of the will which led
them there in the first place."
        I didn't have any plans for a life of crime, so I asked him about the thing that bothered me
most. "The General said that over half your population is on the dole; that we wouldn't be able to get
jobs either. Well?"
         "I don't know this word 'dole.' Of course you mean the government-subsidized unemployed.
That's true, the government takes care of over half of us—I'd never had a job until I was drafted. I
was a composer.
         "Don't you see that there are two sides to this business of chronic unemployment? The world
and the war could be run smoothly by a billion, certainly two billion people. This doesn't mean that
the rest of us sit around idle.
         "Every citizen has the opportunity for up to eighteen years' free education—fourteen years are
compulsory. This and the freedom from necessity of employment have caused a burgeoning of
scholarly and creative activity on a scale unmatched in afl of human history— there are more artists
and writers working today than lived in the first two thousand years of the Christian era! And their
works go to a wider and more educated audience than has ever before existed."
         That was something to think about. Rabi raised his hand. "Have you produced a Shakespeare
yet? A Michaelangelo? Number isn't everything."
         Siri brushed hair out of his eyes with a thoroughly feminine gesture. "That's not a fair
question. It's up to posterity to make comparisons like that."
         "Sergeant, when we were talking earlier," the general said, "didn't you say that you lived in a
huge beehive of a building, that nobody could live in the country?"
         "Well, sir, it's true that nobody can live on potential farm land. And where I live, ttved,
Atlanta Complex, I had seven million neighbors in what you could technically call one building—but
it's not as if we ever felt crowded. And you can go down the elevator any time, walk in the fields,
walk all the way to the sea if you want. . .
         "That's something you should be prepared for. A lot of cities don't bear any resemblance to
the random agglomerations of buildings they used to be. Most of the big cities were burned to the
ground in the food riots in 2004, just before the UN took over the production and distribution of
food. The city planners usually rebuilt along modern, functional lines.
         "Paris and London, for instance, had to be rebuilt completely. Most world capitals did, though
Washington survived. It's just a bunch of monuments and offices, though; almost everybody lives in
the surrounding complexes, Reston, Frederick, Columbia."
         Then Siri mentioned specific towns and cities —everybody wanted to know about their
hometown— and, in general, things sounded a lot better than we had expected.
         In response to a rude question, Siri said that he didn't wear cosmetics just because he was a
homosexual; everybody did. I decided I'd be a maverick and just wear my face.
         We consolidated with the survivors from Earth's Hope II and took that cruiser back to Earth
while analysts assessed the Anniversary's damage. The Commodore was scheduled for a hearing but,
as far as we knew, was not going to be court-martialed.
         Discipline was fairly relaxed on the way back. In seven months I read thirty books, learned
how to play Go, taught an informal class in elementary —and out-of-date— physics and grew ever
closer to Marygay.

8
         I hadn't given it much thought, but of course we were celebrities on Earth. At the Cape the
Sec-Gen greeted each of us personally—he was a very old tiny black man named Yakubu Ojukwu—
and there were hundreds of thousands, maybe millions, of spectators crowded as close as they could
get to die landing field.
         The Sec-Gen gave a speech to the crowd and the newsmen; then the ranking officers of
Earth's Hope II babbled some predictable stuff, while the rest of us stood more-or-less patiently in the
tropical heat
         We took a big chopper to Jacksonville, where the nearest international airport was. The city
itself had been rebuilt along the lines Siri had described. You had to be impressed.
        We first saw it as a solitary gray mountain, a slightly irregular cone, slipping up over the
horizon and growing slowly larger. It was sitting in the middle of a seemingly endless patchwork
quilt of cultivated fields, dozens of roads and rails converging on it. The eye saw these roads, fine
white threads with infinitesimal bugs crawling on them, but the brain refused to integrate the
information into an estimate of the size of the thing. It couldn't be that big.
        We came closer and closer—updrafts making the ride a little bumpy—until finally the
building seemed to be a light gray wall taking up our entire field of vision on one side. We moved
closer and could barely see dots of people; one dot was on a balcony and might have been waving.
        "This is as close as we can come," the pilot said over an intercom, "without locking into the
city's guidance system and landing on top. Airport's to the north." We banked away, through the
shadow of the city.
        The airport was no great marvel, larger than any I'd ever seen before but conventional in
design: a central terminal like the hub of a wheel, with monorails leading out a kilometer or so to
smaller terminals where airplanes loaded and unloaded. We skipped the terminals completely, landed
near a Swissair stratospheric liner and walked from the chopper to the plane. Our pathway was
cordoned off and we were surrounded by a cheering mob. With six billion on relief, I didn't suppose
they had any trouble rounding up a crowd for any such occasion.
        I was afraid we were going to have to sit through some more speeches, but we filed straight
into the plane. Stewards and stewardesses brought us sandwiches and drinks while the crowd was
being dispersed. And there are no words to describe a chicken-salad sandwich and a cold beer after
two years of recycled shit.
Mr. Ojukwu explained that we were going, to Geneva, to the United Nations building, where tonight
we'd be honored by the General Assembly. Or put on display, I thought. He said most of us had
relatives waiting in Geneva.
        As we climbed over the Atlantic, the water seemed unnaturally green. I was curious, made a
mental note to ask the stewardess, but then the reason became apparent. It was a farm. Four large
rafts (they must have been huge, but I had no idea how high up we were) moved in slow tandem
across the green surface, each raft leaving a blue-black swath that slowly faded. Before we landed I
found out that it was a kind of tropical algae, raised for livestock feed.
        Geneva was a single building similar to Jacksonville, but seemed smaller, perhaps dwarfted
by the natural mountains surrounding it It was covered with snow, softly beautiful.
        We walked for a minute through swirling snow —how great not to be exactly at "room
temperature" all the time!— to a chopper that took us to the top of the building; then down an
elevator, across a slidewalk, down another elevator, another slidewalk, down a broad stationary
corridor to Thantstrasse 28 IB, room 45, matching the address on the directions they'd given me. My
finger poised over the doorbell button; I was almost afraid.
        I had adjusted fairly well to the fact that my father was dead—the army had had such facts
waiting for us at Stargate—and that didn't bother me as much as the prospect of seeing my mother,
suddenly eighty-four. I almost ducked out to find a bar and desensitize, but went ahead and pushed
the button.
        The door opened quickly. She was older but not that much different, a few more lines and
hair white instead of gray. We stared at each other for a second and then embraced, and I was
surprised and relieved at how happy I was to see her, hold her.
        She took my cape and hustled me into the living room of the suite, where I got a real shock:
my father was standing there, smiling but serious, inevitable pipe in his hand. I felt a flash of anger at
the army for having misled me— then realized he couldn't be my father, looking as he did, the way I
remembered him from childhood.
        "Michael? Mike?"
        He laughed. "Who else, Willy?" My kid brother, quite middle-aged. I hadn't seen him since
'93, when I went off to college. He'd been sixteen then; two years later he was on the moon with
UNEF.
        "Get tired of the moon?" I asked, handshaking.
        "Huh? Oh ... no, Willy, I spend a month or two every year back on terra firma. It's not like it
used to be." When they were first recruiting for the moon, it was with the understanding that you got
only one trip back. Fuel cost too much for commuting.
        The three of us sat down around a marble coffee table and Mother passed around joints.
        "Everything has changed so much," I said, before they could start asking about the war. "Tell
me everything."
        My brother fluttered his hands and laughed. "That's a tall enough order. Have a couple of
weeks?" He was obviously having trouble figuring out how to act toward me. Was I his nephew, or
what? Certainly not his older brother any more.
        "You shouldn't ask Michael, anyhow," Mother said. "Loonies talk about Earth the way virgins
talk about sex."
        "Now, Mother . . ."
        "With enthusiasm and ignorance."
        I lit up the joint and inhaled deeply. It was oddly sweet
        "Loonies live a few weeks out of the year on Earth and spend half that time telling us how we
ought to be running things."
        "Possibly. But the other half of the time we're observing. Objectively."
        "Here comes my Michael's 'objective' number." She leaned back and smiled at him.
        "Mom, you know ... oh hell, let's drop it. Willy's got the rest of his life to sort it out." He took
a puff on the joint and I noticed he wasn't inhaling. "Tell us about the war, man. Heard you were on
the strike force that actually fought the Taurans. Face to face."
        "Yeah. It wasn't much."
        "That's right," Mike said. "I heard they were cowards."
        "Not so much . . . that" I shook my head to clear it The marijuana was making me drowsy and
lightheaded. "It was more like they just didn't get the idea. Like a shooting gallery. They lined up and
we shot 'em down."
        "How could that be?" Mom said. "On the news they said you lost nineteen people."
        "Did they say nineteen were killed? That's not true."
        "I don't remember exactly."
        "Well, we did lose nineteen people, but only four of them were killed. That was in the early
part of the battle, before we had their defenses figured out." I decided not to say anything about the
way Chu died. That would get too complicated. "Of the other fifteen, one was shot by one of our own
lasers. He lost an arm but lived. All of the others . . . lost their minds."
        "What—some kind of Tauran weapon?" Mike asked.
        "The Taurans didn't have anything to do with it! It was the army. They conditioned us to kill
anything that moved, once the sergeant triggered the conditioning with a few key words. When
people came out of it, they couldn't handle the memory. Being a butcher." I shook my head violently
a couple of times. The dope was really getting to me.
        "Look, I'm sorry." I got to my feet with some effort. "I've been up some twenty—"
        "Of course, William." Mother took my elbow and steered me to a bedroom and promised to
wake me in plenty of time for the evening's festivities. The bed was indecently comfortable but I
could've slept leaning up against a lumpy tree.
        Fatigue and dope and too full a day: Mother had to wake me up by trickling cold water on my
face. She steered me to a closet and identified two outfits as being formal enough for the occasion. I
chose a brick-red one—the powder blue seeming a little foppish—showered and shaved, refused
cosmetics (Mike was all dolled up and offered to help me), armed myself with the half-page of
instructions telling how to get to the General Assembly, and was off.
        I got lost twice along the way, but they had little computers at every corridor intersection that
would give directions to any place, in fourteen languages.
        Men's clothing, as far as I was concerned, had really taken a step backwards. From the waist
up it wasn't so bad, tight high-necked blouse with a short cape; but then there was a wide shiny
functionless belt, from which dangled a little jeweled dagger, perhaps adequate for opening mail; and
then pantaloons that flounced out in great pleats and were rucked into shiny synthetic high-heeled
boots that came almost to your knees. Give me a plumed hat and Shakespeare would've hired me on
the spot.
        The women fared better. I met Marygay outside the General Assembly hall.
        "I feel absolutely naked, William."
        "Looks good, though. Anyhow, it's the style." Most of the young women I'd passed had been
wearing a similar outfit: a simple shift with large rectangular windows cut in both sides, from armpit
to hem. The hem ended where your imagination began. For modesty, the outfits required very
conservative movements and a great faith in static electricity.
        "Have you seen this place?" she said, taking my arm. "Let's go in. Conquistador."
        We walked in through the automatic doors and I stopped short. The hall was so large that
going into it I felt as though I'd stepped outdoors.
        The floor was circular, more than a hundred meters in diameter. The walls rose a good sixty
or seventy meters to a transparent dome—I remembered having seen it when we landed—on which
gray drifts of snow danced and blew swirling away. The walls were done in a muted ceramic mosaic,
thousands of figures representing a chronology of human achievement. I don't know how long I
stared.
        Across the hall, we joined the other hardy veterans for coffee. It was synthetic, but better than
soya. To my dismay, I learned that tobacco was rarely grown on Earth and even, through local option,
was outlawed in some areas in order to conserve arable land. What you could get was expensive and
usually wretched, having been grown by amateurs on tiny backyard or balcony plots. The only good
tobacco was lunar and its price was, well, astronomical.
        Marijuana was plentiful and cheap. In some countries, like the United States, it was free;
produced and distributed by the government.
        I offered Marygay a joint and she declined. "I've got to get used to them slowly. I had one
earlier and it almost knocked me out" "Me too."
        An old man in uniform walked into the lounge, his breast a riotous fruit-salad of ribbons, his
shoulders weighed down with five stars apiece. He smiled benignly when half the people jumped to
their feet. I was too much a civilian and remained seated.
        "Good evening, good evening," he said, making a patting sit-down motion with his hands.
"It's good to see you here. Good to see so many of you." Many? A little more than half the number
we started out with. "I'm General Gary Manker, UNEF Chief of Staff. In a few minutes we're going
over there," he nodded in the direction of the General Assembly hall, "for a short ceremony. Then
you'll be free for a well-deserved rest; put your feet up for a few months, see the world, whatever you
want. So long as you can keep the reporters away.
        "Before you go, though, I'd like to say a few words about what you'll want to do after those
months, when you get tired of being on vacation, when the money starts to run low . . ." Predictably,
the same spiel General Botsford had given us at Stargate. You're going to need a job, and this is the
one job you can be sure of getting.
        The General left after saying that an aide would be by in a few minutes to herd us over to the
rostrum. We amused ourselves for several minutes, discussing the merits of re-enlistment.
        The aide turned out to be a good-looking young woman who had no trouble jollying us into
alphabetical order (she didn't seem to have any higher an opinion of the military than did we) and
leading us over to the hall.
        The first couple of rows of delegates had abandoned their desks to us. I sat in the "Gambia"
place and listened uncomfortably to tales of heroism arid sacrifices. General Manker had most of the
facts right but used slightly wrong words.
         Then they called us up one by one and Dr. pjukwu gave each of us a gold medal that must
have weighed a kilogram. Then he gave a little speech about-mankind united in common cause while
discreet holo cameras scanned us one by one. Inspiring fare for the folks back home. Then we filed
out under waves of applause that were somehow oppressive.
         I had asked Marygay, who had no living relatives, to come on up and sack with me. There
was a crowd milling around the formal entrance of the hall, so we hustled the other way, took the
first escalator up several stories and got totally lost on a succession of slidewalks and lifts. Then we
used the little corner boxes to find our way home.
         I'd told Mother about Marygay and that I'd probably be bringing her back. They greeted each
other warmly and Mother settled us in the living room with a couple of drinks and went off to start
dinner. Mike joined us.
         "You're going to find Earth awfully boring," he said after amenities.
         "I don't know," I said. "Army life isn't exactly stimulating. Any change has got to be—"
         "You can't get a job."
         "Not in physics, I know; twenty-six years is like a geologic—"
         "You can't get any job."
         "Well, I'd planned to go back and take my master's degree over, maybe go on . . ." Mike was
snaking his head.
         "Let him finish, William." Marygay shifted restlessly. "I think he knows something we don't."
         He finished his drink and swirled the ice around in the bottom of the glass, staring at it.
"That's right. You know, the moon is all UNEF, civilians and military, and we amuse ourselves by
passing rumors back and forth."
         "Old military pastime."
         "Uh-huh. Well, I heard a rumor about you . . ." he made a sweeping gesture, "you veterans
and went to the trouble to check it out. It was true."
         "Glad to hear it."
         "Yeah, you will be." He set down his drink, took out a joint, looked at it, put it back. "UNEF
is going to do anything short of kidnapping to get you people back. They control the Employment
Board, and you can be damned sure you're going to be undertrained or overtrained for any job
opening that comes along. Except soldier."
         "Are you sure?" Marygay asked. We both knew enough not to claim they couldn't do a thing
like that.        "Sure as a Christian. I have a friend on the Luna division of the Employment Board.
He showed me the directive; it's worded very politely. And it says 'absolutely no exceptions.'"
         "Maybe by the time I get out of school—"
         "You'll never get into school. Never get past the maze of standards and quotas. If you try to
push, they'll claim you're too old —hell, I couldn't get into a doctoral program at my age, and —"
         "Yeah, I get the idea. I'm two years older." "That's it. You've got the choice of either spending
the rest of your life on relief or soldiering."
         "No contest," Marygay said. "Relief."
         I agreed. "If five or six billion people can carve out a decent life without a profession, I can
too."
         "They've grown up in it," Mike said. "And it may not be what you would call a 'decent life.'
Most of them just sit around and smoke dope and watch the holo. Get just enough to eat to balance
their caloric output. Meat once a week. Even on Class I relief."
         "That won't be anything new," I said. "The food part, anyhow —it's exactly the way we were
fed in the army.
         "As for the rest of it, as you just said, Marygay and I didn't grow up in it; we're not likely to sit
around half-blown and stare at the cube all day."
         "I paint," Marygay said. "I always wanted to settle down and get really good at it."
        "And I can continue studying physics even if it's not for a degree. And take up music or
writing or—" I turned to Marygay, "or any of those things the sergeant talked about at Stargate."
        "Join the New Renaissance," he said without inflection, lighting his pipe. It was tobacco and
smelled delicious.
        He must have noticed my hunger. "Oh, I'm being a hell of a host." He got some papers out of
his purse and rolled an expert joint. "Here. Marygay?"
        "No thanks—if it's as hard to get as they say, I don't want to get back into the habit."
        He nodded, relighting his pipe. "Never did anybody any good. Better to train your mind, be
able to relax without it." He turned to me. "The army did keep up your cancer boosters?"
        "Sure." Wouldn't do for you to die in so unsoldierly a fashion. I lit up the slender cigarette.
"Good stuff."
        "Better than anything you'll get on Earth. Lunar marijuana is better, too. Doesn't mess you up
so much."
        Mother came in and sat down. "Dirmer'll be ready in a few minutes. I hear Michael making
unfair comparisons again."
        "What's unfair? Earth marijuana, a couple of j's and you're a zombie."
        "Correction: you are. You're just not used to it."
        "OK, OK. And a boy shouldn't argue with his mother."
        "Not when she's right," she said, strangely without humor. "Well! Do you children like fish?"
We talked about how hungry we were, a safe enough subject, for a few minutes and then sat down to
a huge broiled red snapper, served on a bed of rice. It was the first square meal Marygay and I had
had in twenty-six years.

        Like everyone else, the next day I went to get interviewed on the cube. It was a frustrating
experience.
        Commentator: "Sergeant Mandella, you are one of the most-decorated soldiers in the UNEF."
True, all of us had gotten a fistful of ribbons at Stargate. "You participated in the famous Aleph-null
campaign, the first actual contact with Taurans, and just returned from an assault on Yod-4."
        Me: "Well, you couldn't call it—"
        Commentator: "Before we talk about Yod-4, I'm sure the audience would be very interested in
your personal impression of the enemy, as one of the very few people to have met them face-to-face.
They're pretty horrible looking, aren't they?"
        Me: "Well, yes; I'm sure you've seen the pictures. About all they don't show is the texture of
the skin. It's pebbly and wrinkled like a lizard's, but pale orange."
        Commentator: "What do they smell like?" Smell?
        Me: "I haven't got the faintest idea. All you can smell in a spacesuit is yourself."
        Commentator: "Ha-ha, I see. What I'm trying to get, Sergeant, is how you felt, the first time
you saw the enemy. . . . Were you afraid of them, disgusted, enraged, or what?"
        "Well, I was afraid, the first time, and disgusted. Mostly afraid —but that was before the
battle, when a solitary Tauran flew overhead. During the actual battle, we were under the influence of
hate-conditioning— they conditioned us on Earth and triggered it with a phrase— and I didn't feel
much except the artificial rage."
        "You despised them —and showed no mercy." 110
        "Right. Murdered them all, even though they made no attempt to fight back. But when they
released us from the conditioning . . . well, we couldn't believe we had been such butchers. Fourteen
people went insane and all the rest of us were on tranquilizers for weeks."
        "Ah," he said absentmindedly, and glanced over to the side for a moment. "How many of
them did you kill, yourself?"
        "Fifteen, twenty—I don't know; as I said, we weren't in control of ourselves. It was a
massacre."
         All through the interview, the commentator seemed a bit dense, repetitive. That night I found
out why.
         Marygay and I were watching the cube with Mike. Mom was off getting fitted for some
artificial teeth (the dentists in Geneva supposedly being better than American ones). My interview
was on a program called "Potpourri," sandwiched between a documentary on lunar hydroponics and a
concert by a man who claimed to be able to pay Telemann's Double Fantasia in A Major on the
harmonica. I wondered whether anybody else in Geneva, in the world, was tuned in.
         Well, the hydroponics thing was interesting and the harmonica player was a virtuoso, but the
thing in between was pure drivel.
         Commentator: "What do they smell like?"
         Me (off camera): "Just horrible, a combination of rotten vegetables and burning sulfur. The
smell leaks in through the suit's exhaust."
         He had kept me talking and talking in order to get a wide spectrum of sounds, from which he
could synthesize any kind of nonsense in response to his questions.
         "How the hell can he do that?" I asked Mike when the show was over.
         "Don't be too hard on him," Mike said, watching the quadruplicated musician play four
different harmonicas against himself. "All the media are censored by the UNEF. It's been ten, twelve
years since Earth had any objective reporting about the war. You're lucky they didn't just substitute an
actor for you and feed him lines."
         "Is it any better on Luna?"
         "Not as far as public broadcast. But since every one there is tied into UNEF, it's easy enough
to find out when they're lying outright."
         "He completely cut out the part about conditioning." "Understandable." Mike shrugged.
"They need heroes, not automatons."
         Marygay's interview was on an hour later, and they had done the same thing to her. Every
time she had originally said something against the war or the army, the cube would switch to a close-
up of the woman interviewing her, who would nod sagely while a remarkable imitation of Marygay's
voice gave out arrant nonsense.
         UNEF was paying for five days' room and board in Geneva, and it seemed as good a place as
any to begin exploring this new Earth. The next morning we got a map, which was a book a
centimeter thick—and took a lift to the ground floor, determined to work our way up to the roof
without missing anything.
         The ground floor was an odd mixture of history and heavy industry. The base of the building
covered a large part of what used to be the city of Geneva, and a lot of old buildings were preserved.
         Mostly, though, it was all noise and hustle: big g-e trucks growling in from outside, shedding
clouds of snow; barges booming against dock pilings (the Rhone River crawls through the middle of
the huge expanse); even a few little helicopters beating this way and that, coordinating things,
keeping away from the struts and buttresses that held up the gray sky of the next floor, forty meters
up.
         It was a marvel and more, and we could have watched it for hours, but we would've frozen
solid in a few minutes with just light capes against the wind and cold. We decided we'd come back
another day, more warmly dressed.
         The floor above was called the first floor, in defiance of logic. Marygay explained that the
Europeans had always numbered them that way. (Funny, I'd been a thousand light-years from New
Mexico, and back, but this was the first time I'd crossed the Atlantic.) It was the brains of the
organism, where the bureaucrats and the systems analysts and the cryogenic handymen hung around.
         We stood in a large quiet lobby that somehow smelled of glass. One wall was a huge holo
cube displaying Geneva's table of organization, a spidery orange pyramid with tens of thousands of
names connected by lines, from the mayor at top to the "corridor security" people at the base. Names
flicked out and were replaced by new ones as people died or were fired or promoted or demoted.
Shimmering, changing shape, it looked like the nervous system of some fantastic creature. In a sense,
of course, it was.
        The wall opposite from the holo cube was a window overlooking a large room which a plaque
identified as the "Kontrollezimmer." Behind the glass were hundreds of technicians in neat rows and
columns, each with his own console with a semi-flat holo surrounded by dials and switches. There
was an electric, busy air to the place: most of the people had on an earphone-microphone headset,
and talked with some other technician while they scribbled on a tablet or fiddled with switches;
others rattled away on console keyboards with their headsets dangling from their necks. A very few
seats were empty, their owners striding around looking important. An automated coffee tray slid
slowly up one row and down the next.
        Through the glass you could hear a fault susurrus of what must have been an unholy
commotion inside.
        There were only two other people in the lobby, and we overheard them say they were going to
look at "the brain." We followed them down a long corridor to another viewing area, rather small in
comparison to the one overlooking the control room, looking down on the computers that held
Geneva together. The only illumination in the viewing area was the faint cold blue light from the
room below.
        The computer room was also small in comparison, about the size of a baseball diamond. The
computer elements were featureless gray boxes of various sizes, connected by a maze of man-sized
glass tunnels which had airlocks at regular intervals. Evidently this system allowed access to one
element at a time, for repair, while the rest of the room remained at a temperature near absolute zero,
for superconductivity.
Though lacking the nervous activity of the control room, and far from the exciting hurly-burly on the
floor below, the computer room was more impressive in its own static way: the feeling of vast,
unknowable powers under constraint; a shrine to purpose, order, intelligence.
        The other couple told us there was nothing else of interest on the floor, just meeting rooms
and offices and busy officials. We got back on the lift and went to the second floor, which was the
main shopping arcade.
        Here, the map-book was very handy. The arcade was hundreds of shops and "open-air"
markets arranged in a rectangular grid pattern, with interlacing slidewalks defining blocks where
related shops were grouped together. We went to the central mall, which turned out to be a whimsical
reconstruction of medieval village architecture. There was a baroque church whose steeple, by
holographic illusion, extended into the third and fourth floors. Smooth wall mosaics with primitive
religious scenes, cobblestones laid out in intricate patterns, a fountain with water spraying from
monsters' mouths ... we bought a bunch of grapes from an open-air greengrocer (the illusion faltered
when he took a caloric ticket and stamped my ration book) and walked along the narrow brick
sidewalks, loving it. I was glad Earth still had time, and energy and resources, for this sort of thing.
        There was a bewildering variety of objects and services for sale, and we had plenty of money,
but we'd gotten out of the habit of buying things, I guess, and we didn't know how long our fortunes
were going to have to last.
        (We did have fortunes, in spite of what General Botsford had said. Rogers' father was some
kind of hot-shot tax lawyer, and she'd passed the word —we only had to pay tax at the rate set for our
average annual income. I wound up with $280,000.)
        We skipped the third floor, mostly communications, because we'd crawled all over it the day
before, when we went for our interviews. I was tempted to go speak to fee person who'd rearranged
my words, but Marygay convinced me it would be futile.
        The artificial mountain of Geneva is "stepped"—like a wedding cake—the first three floors
and the ground level about a kilometer in diameter, rising about a hundred meters, floors four
through thirty-two the same height but about half the diameter. Floors thirty-three through seventy-
two make up the top cylinder, about 300 meters in diameter by 120 high.
        The fourth floor, like the thirty-third, is a park: trees, brooks, little animals. The walls are
transparent, open in good weather, and the "shelf (the roof of the third floor) is planted in heavy
forest. We rested for a while by a pond, watching people swim and feeding bits of grape to the
minnows.
        Something had been bothering me subliminally ever since we arrived in Geneva and
suddenly, surrounded by all those pleasant people, I knew what it was. .               "Marygay," I said.
"Nobody here is unhappy."
        She smiled. "Who could be glum in a place like this? All the flowers and—"
        "No, no ... I mean in all of Geneva. Have you seen anybody who looked like he might be
dissatisfied with the way things are? Who—"
        "Your brother . . ."
        "Yeah, but he's a foreigner too. I mean the merchants and workers and the people just hanging
around."
        She looked thoughtful. "I haven't really been looking. Maybe not."
        "Doesn't that strike you as strange?" "It is unusual ... but .. ." She threw a whole grape in the
water and the minnows scattered. "Remember what that homosexual sergeant said? They diagnose
and correct antisocial traits at a very early age. And what rational person wouldn't be happy here?"
        I snorted. "Half of these people are out of work and most of the others are doing artificial jobs
that are either redundant or could be done better by machine."
        "But they all have enough to eat and plenty to occupy their minds. That wasn't so, twenty-six
years ago."
        "Maybe," I said, not wanting to argue. "I suppose you're right." Still, it bothered me.

9
        We spent the rest of that day and all of the next in the UN headquarters (essentially the capital
of the world), that took up the whole top cylinder of Geneva. It would have taken weeks to see
everything. Hell, it would take more than a week just to cover the Family of Man Museum. Every
country had its own individual display, with a shop selling typical crafts, sometimes a restaurant with
native food. I had been afraid that national identities might have been submerged, that this new world
would be long on order and short on variety. Glad to have been mistaken.
        Marygay and I planned a travel itinerary while we toured the UN. We decided we'd go back to
the United States and find a place to stay, then spend a couple of months traveling again.
        When I approached Mom for advice in getting an apartment, she seemed strangely
embarrassed, the way Sergeant Siri had been. But she said she'd see what was available in
Washington when she went back the next day (my father'd had a job there and Mom hadn't seen any
reason to move after he died).
        I asked Mike about this reluctance to talk about housing and he said it was a hangover from
the chaotic years between the food riots and the Reconstruction. There hadn't been enough roofs to go
around; people had had to live two families to a room even in countries that had been prosperous. It
had been an unstable situation and finally the UN stepped in, first with a propaganda campaign and
finally with mass conditioning, reinforcing the idea that it was virtuous to live in as small a place as
possible, that it was sinful to even want to live alone or in a place with lots of room. And one didn't,
talk about it.
        Most people still had some remnant of this conditioning, even though they had been
detoxified over a decade before. In various strata of society it was impolite or unforgivable or rather
daring to talk about such things.
        Mom went back to Washington and Mike to Luna, and Marygay and I stayed on at Geneva for
a couple of days.
        We got off the plane at Dulles and found a monorail to Rifton, the satellite-city where Mom
lived.
         It was refreshingly small after vast Geneva, even though it spread over a larger area. It was a
pleasingly diverse jumble of various kinds of buildings, only a couple more than a few stories high,
arranged around a lake, surrounded by trees. All of the buildings were connected by slidewalk to the
largest place, a fullerdome with stores and schools and offices. There we found a directory that told
us how to get to Mom's place, a duplex on the lake.
         We could have taken the enclosed slidewalk but instead walked alongside it in the good cold
air that smelled of fallen leaves. People slid by on the other side of the plastic, carefully not staring.
         Mom didn't answer her door, but it turned out not to be locked. It was a comfortable place,
extremely spacious by starship standards, full of twentieth-century furniture. Mom was asleep in the
bedroom, so Marygay and I settled in the living room and read for a while.
         We were startled suddenly by a loud fit of coughing from the bedroom. I raced over and
knocked on the door.
         "William? I didn't—" coughing "—come in, I didn't know you were . . ."
         She was propped up in bed, the light on, surrounded by various nostrums. She looked ghastly,
pale and lined.
         She lit a joint and it seemed to quell the coughing. "When did you get in? I didn't know . . ."
         "Just a few minutes ago. . . . How long has this . . . have you been . . ."
         "Oh, it's just a bug I picked up ha Geneva. Til be fine in a couple of days." She started
coughing again, drank some thick red liquid from a bottle. All of her medicines seemed to be the
commercial, patent variety.
         "Have you seen a doctor?"
         "Doctor? Heavens no, Willy. They don't have . . . it's not serious . . . don't—"
         "Not serious?" At eighty-four. "For Chrissake, Mother." I went to the phone in the kitchen
and with some difficulty managed to get the hospital.
         A plain girl in her twenties formed in the cube. "Nurse Donalson, general services." She had a
fixed smile, professional sincerity. But then everybody smiled.
         "My mother needs to be looked at by a doctor. She has a—"
         "Name and number, please."
         "Bette Mandella." I spelled it. "What number?"
         "Medical services number, of course," she smiled.
         I called into Mom and asked her what her number was. "She says she can't remember."
         "That's all right, sir, I'm sure I can find her records." She turned her smile to a keyboard
beside her and punched out a code.
         "Bette Mandella?" she said, her smile turning quizzical. "You're her son? She must be in her
eighties."
         "Please. It's a long story. She really has to see a doctor."
         "Is this some kind of joke?"
         "What do you mean?" Strangled coughing from the other room, the worst yet. "Really—this
might be very serious, you've got to—"
         "But sir, Mrs. Mandella got a zero priority rating way back in 2010."
         "What the hell is that supposed to mean?"
         "S-i-r . . ." The smile was hardening in place.
         "Look. Pretend that I came from another planet What is a 'zero priority rating'?"
         "Another—oh! I know you!" She looked off to the left. "Sonya—come over here a second.
You'd never guess who . . ." Another face crowded the cube, a vapid blonde girl whose smile was
twin to the other nurse's. "Remember? On the stat this morning?"
         "Oh, yeah," she said. "One of the soldiers—hey, that's really max, really max." The head
withdrew.
         "Oh, Mr. Mandella," she said, effusive. "No wonder you're confused. It's really very simple."
         "Well?"
         "It's part of the Universal Medical Security System. Everybody gets a rating on their
seventieth birthday. It comes in automatically from Geneva."
         "What does it rate? What does it mean?" But the ugly truth was obvious.
         "Well, it tells how important a person is and what level of treatment he's allowed. Class three
is the same as anybody else's; class two is the same except for certain life-extending—"
         "And class zero is no treatment at all."
         "That's correct, Mr. Mandella." And in her smile was not a glimmer of pity or understanding.
         "Thank you." I disconnected. Marygay was standing behind me, crying soundlessly with her
mouth wide open.

        I found a mountaineer's oxygen tank at a sporting goods store and even managed to get some
black-market antibiotics through a character in a bar downtown in Washington. But Mom was
beyond being able to respond to amateur treatment. She lived four days. The people from the
crematorium had the same fixed smile.
        I tried to get through to Mike but the phone company wouldn't let me place the call until I had
signed a contract and posted a $25,000 bond. I had to get a credit transfer from Geneva. The
paperwork took half a day.
        I finally got through to him. Without preamble:
        "Mother's dead."
        For a fraction of a second, the radio waves wandered up to the moon, and in another fraction,
came back. He started and then nodded his head slowly. "No surprise. Every time I've come down to
Earth the past ten years, I've wondered whether she'd still be there. Neither of us had enough money
to keep in very close touch." He had told us in Geneva that a letter from Luna to Earth cost $100
postage—plus $5,000 tax. It discouraged communication with what the UN considered to be a bunch
of regrettably necessary anarchists.
        We commiserated for a while and then Mike said, "Willy, Earth is no place for you and
Marygay; you know that by now. Come to Luna. Where you can still be an individual. Where we
don't throw people out the airlock on their seventieth birthday."
        "We'd have to rejoin UNEF."
        "True, but you wouldn't have to fight They say they need you more for training. You could
study in your spare time, bring your physics up to date—maybe wind up eventually in research."
        We talked some more, a total of three minutes. I got $1000 back.
        Marygay and I talked about it through the night Maybe our decision would have been
different if we hadn't been staying there, surrounded by Mother's life and death, but when the dawn
came the proud, ambitious, careful beauty of Rifton had turned sinister and foreboding.
        We packed our bags and had our money transferred to the Tycho Credit Union and took a
monorail to the Cape.

10
        "In case you're interested, you aren't the only combat veterans to have come back." The
recruiting officer Vas a muscular lieutenant of indeterminate gender. I flipped a coin mentally and
came up tails.
        "Last I heard, there had been nine others," she said in her husky tenor. "All of them opted for
the moon. . . . Maybe you'll find some of your friends there." She slid two simple forms across the
desk. "Sign these and you're in again. Second lieutenants."
        The form was a simple request to be assigned to active duty; we had never really gotten out of
UNEF, since they had extended the draft law, but had just been on inactive status. I scrutinized the
paper.
        "There's nothing on here about the guarantees we were promised at Stargate."
        "What guarantees?" She had that bland, mechanical Earthsmile.
        "We were guaranteed assignment of choice and location of choice. There's nothing about that
on this contract"
        "That won't be necessary. The Force will . . ." "/ think it's necessary, Lieutenant." I handed
back the form. So did Marygay.
        "Let me check." She left the desk and disappeared into an office. She was on a phone for a
while and then we heard a printer rattle.
        She brought back the same two sheets, with an addition typed under our names:
GUARANTEED LOCATION OF CHOICE (LUNA) AND ASSIGNMENT OF CHOICE
(COMBAT TRAINING SPECIALIST).
        We got a thorough physical checkup and were fitted for new fighting suits. The next morning
we caught the first shuttle to orbit, enjoyed zero-gee for a few hours while they transferred cargo to a
spidery tachyon-torch shuttle, then zipped to the moon, setting down at Gri-maldi base.
        On the door to the Transient Officers' Billet, some wag had scratched "abandon hope all ye
who enter." We found our two-person cubicle and began changing for chow.
        Two raps on the door. "Mail call, sirs."
        I opened the door and the sergeant standing Jhere saluted. Just looked at him for a second and
then remembered I was an officer and returned the salute. He handed me two identical 'faxes. I gave
one to Marygay. Our hearts must have stopped simultaneously:

**ORDERS* "ORDERS* *ORDERS* "ORDERS* *ORDERS* *ORDERS* * ORDERS* *

THE FOLLOWING NAMED PERSONNEL:
Mandella William 2LT [11 575 278] COCOMM D Co
GRITRABNAND
Potter Marygay 2LT [17 386 907] COCOMM B Co
GRTTRABN

ARE HEREBY REASSIGNED TO:
2LT Mandella: PLCOMM 2 PL STFTHETA STAR-GATE
2LT Potter: PLCOMM 3 PL STFTHETA STAR-GATE
DESCRIPTION OF DUTIES: command infantry platoon in Tet-2 campaign.
*********************************************************************************
*************
THE ABOVE NAMED PERSONNEL WILL REPORT IMMEDIATELY TO GRIMALDI
TRANSPORTATION BATTALION TO BE MANIFESTED TO NEW ASSIGNMENT.
ISSUED STARGATE TACBD-1298-8684-1450/4 December 2024 SG
BY AUTH STFCOM Commander
**ORDERS**'ORDERS* *ORDERS* ""ORDERS* * ORDERS* *ORDERS* *ORDERS* *

        "They didn't waste any time, did they?" Marygay said bitterly.
        "Must be a standing order. Strike Force Command's light-weeks away. They can't even know
we've re-upped yet."
        "What about our . . ." she let it trail off.
        The guarantee. "Well, we were given our assignment of choice. Nobody guaranteed we'd have
the assignment for more than an hour."
        "It's so dirty."
        I shrugged. "It's so army." But I had two disturbing feelings:
        That all along we knew this was going to happen.
        That we were going home.
LIEUTENANT MANDELLA
2024-2389 A.D.

1
        "Quick and dirty." I was looking at my platoon sergeant, Santesteban, but talking to myself.
And anybody else who was listening.
        "Yeah," he said. "Gotta do it in the first coupla minutes or we're screwed tight" He was
matter-of-fact, laconic. Drugged.
        Private Collins came up with Halliday. They were holding hands unself-consciously.
"Lieutenant Mandel-la?" Her voice broke a little. "Can we have just a minute?"
        "One minute," I said, too abruptly. "We have to leave in five, I'm sorry."
        Hard to watch those two together now. Neither one had any combat experience. But they
knew what everybody did; how sum their chances were of ever being together again. They slumped
in a corner and mumbled words and traded mechanical caresses, no passion or even comfort. Collin's
eyes shone but she wasn't weeping. Halliday just looked grim, numb. She was normally . by far the
prettier of the two, but the sparkle had gone out of her and left a well-formed dull shell.
        I'd gotten used to open female homosex in the months since we'd left Earth. Even stopped
resenting the loss of potential partners. The men together still gave me a chill, though.
        I stripped and backed into the clamshelled suit. The new ones were a hell of a lot more
complicated, with all the new biometrics and trauma maintenance. But well worth the trouble of
hooking up, in case you got blown apart just a little bit. Go home to a comfortable pension with
heroic prosthesis. They were even talking about the possibility of regeneration, at least for missing
arms and legs. Better get it soon, before Heaven filled up with fractional people. Heaven was the new
hospital/rest-and-recreation planet
        I finished the set-up sequence and the suit closed by itself. Gritted my teeth against the pain
that never came, when the internal sensors and fluid tubes poked into your body. Conditioned neural
bypass, so you felt only a slight puzzling dislocation. Rather than the death of a thousand cuts.
        Collins and Halliday were getting into their suits now and the other dozen were almost set, so
I stepped over to the third platoon's staging area. Say goodbye again to Marygay.
        She was suited and heading my way. We touched helmets instead of using the radio. Privacy.
        "Feeling OK, honey?"
        "All right," she said. 'Took my pill."
        "Yeah, happy times." I'd taken mine too, supposed to make you feel optimistic without
interfering with your sense of judgment. I knew most of us would probably die, but I didn't feel too
bad about it. "Sack with me tonight?"
        "If we're both here," she said neutrally. "Have to take a pill for that, too." She tried to laugh.
"Sleep, I mean. How're the new people taking it? You have ten?"
        "Ten, yeah, they're OK. Doped up, quarter-dose."
        "I did that, too; try to keep them loose."
        In fact, Santesteban was the only other combat veteran in my platoon; the four corporals had
been in UNEF for a while but hadn't ever fought.
        The speaker in my cheekbone crackled and Commander Cortez said, "Two minutes. Get your
people lined up."
        We had our goodbye and I went back to check my flock. Everybody seemed to have gotten
suited up without any problems, so I put them on line. We waited for what seemed like a long time.
        "All right, load 'em up." With the word "up," the bay door in front of me opened—the staging
area having already been bled of air—and I led my men and women through to the assault ship.
        These new ships were ugly as hell. Just an open framework with clamps to hold you in place,
swiveled lasers fore and aft, small tachyon powerplants below the lasers. Everything automated; the
machine would land us as quickly as possible and then zip off to harass the enemy. It was a one-use,
throwaway drone. The vehicle that would come pick us up if we survived was cradled next to it,
much prettier.
        We clamped in and the assault ship cast off from the Sangre y Victoria with twin spurts from
the yaw jets. Then the voice of the machine gave us a short countdown and we sped off at four gees'
acceleration, straight down.
        The planet, which we hadn't bothered to name, was a chunk of black rock without any normal
star close enough to give it heat. At first it was visible only by the absence of stars where its bulk cut
off their light, but as we dropped closer we could see subtle variations in the blackness of its surface:
We were coming down on the hemisphere opposite the Taurans' outpost.
        Our recon had shown that their camp sat in the middle of a flat lava plain several hundred
kilometers in diameter. It was pretty primitive compared to other Taur-an. bases UNEF had
encountered, but there wouldn't be any sneaking up on it. We were going to careen over the horizon
some fifteen klicks from the place, four ships converging simultaneously from different directions,
all of us decelerating like mad, hopefully to drop right in their laps and come up shooting. There
would be nothing to hide behind.
        I wasn't worried, of course. Abstractedly, I wished I hadn't taken the pill.
        We leveled off about a kilometer from the surface and sped along much faster than the rock's
escape velocity, constantly correcting to keep from flying away. The surface rolled below us in a dark
gray blur; we shed a little light from the pseudo-cerenkov glow made by our tachyon exhaust,
scooting away from our reality into its own.
        The ungainly contraption skimmed and jumped along for some ten minutes; then suddenly the
front jet glowed and we were snapped forward inside our suits, eyeballs trying to escape from their
sockets in the rapid deceleration.
        "Prepare for ejection," the machine's female-mechanical voice said. "Five, four . . ."
        The ship's lasers started firing, millisecond flashes freezing the land below in jerky
stroboscopic motion. It was a twisted, pock-marked jumble of fissures and random black rocks, a few
meters below our feet We were dropping, slowing..
        "Three—" It never got any farther. There was a too-bright flash and I saw the horizon drop
away as the ship's tail pitched down—then clipped the ground, and we were rolling, horribly, pieces
of people and ship scattering. Then we slid pinwheeling to a bumpy halt, and I tried to pull free but
my leg was pinned under the ship's bulk: excruciating pain and a dry crunch as the girder crushed my
leg; shrill whistle of air escaping my breached suit; then the trauma maintenance turned on snick,
more pain, then no pain and I was rolling free, short stump of a leg trailing blood that froze shiny
black on the dull black rock. I tasted brass and a red haze closed everything out, then deepened to the
brown of river clay, then loam and I passed out, with the pill thin Icing this is not so bad. . . .

        The suit is set up to save as much of your body as possible. If you lose part of an arm or a leg,
one of sixteen razor-sharp irises closes around your limb with the force of a hydraulic press, snipping
it off neatly and sealing the suit before you can die of explosive decompression. Then "trauma
maintenance" cauterizes the stump, replaces lost blood, and fills you full of happy-juice and No-
shock. So you will either die happy or, if your comrades go on to win the battle, eventually be carried
back up to the ship's aid station.
        We'd won that round, while I slept swaddled in dark cotton. I woke up in the infirmary. It was
crowded. I was in the middle of a long row of cots, each one holding someone who had been three-
fourths (or less) saved by his suit's trauma maintenance feature. We were being ignored by the ship's
two doctors, who stood in bright light at operating tables, absorbed in blood rituals. I watched them
for a long time. Squinting into the bright light, the blood on their green tunics could have been
grease, the swathed bodies, odd soft machines that they were fixing. But the machines would cry out
in their sleep, and the mechanics muttered reassurances while they plied their greasy tools. I watched
and slept and woke up in different places.

         Finally I woke up in a regular bay. I was strapped down and being fed through a tube,
biosensor electrodes attached here and there, but no medics around. The only other person in the little
room was Marygay, sleeping on the bunk next to me. Her right arm was amputated just above the
elbow.
         I didn't wake her up, just looked at her for a long time and tried to sort out my feelings. Tried
to filter out the effect of the mood drugs. Looking at her stump, I could feel neither empathy nor
revulsion. I tried to force one reaction, and then the other, but nothing real happened. It was as if she
had always been that way. Was it drugs, conditioning, love? Have to wait to see.
         Her eyes opened suddenly and I knew she had been awake for some time, had been giving me
time to think. "Hello, broken toy," she said.
         "How—how do you feel?" Bright question.
         She put a finger to her lips and kissed it, a familiar gesture, reflection. "Stupid, numb. Glad
not to be a soldier anymore." She smiled. "Did they tell you? We're going to Heaven."
         "No. I knew it would be either there or Earth."
         "Heaven will be better." Anything would. "I wish we were there now."
         "How long?" I asked. "How long before we get there?"
         She rolled over and looked at the ceiling. "No telling. You haven't talked to anybody?"
         "Just woke up."
         "There's a new directive they didn't bother to tell us about before. The Sangre y Victoria got
orders for four missions. We have to keep on fighting until we've done all four. Or until we've
sustained so many casualties that it wouldn't be practical to go on."
         "How many is that?"
         "I wonder. We lost a good third already. But we're headed for Aleph-7. Panty raid." New
slang term for the type of operation whose main object we was to gather Tauran artifacts, and
prisoners if possible. I tried to find out where the term came from, but the one explanation I got was
really idiotic.
         One knock on the door and Dr. Foster barged in. He fluttered his hands. "Still in separate
beds? Marygay, I thought you were more recovered than that." Foster was all right. A flaming
niariposa, but he had an amused tolerance for heterosexuality.
         He examined Marygay's stump and then mine. He stuck thermometers in our mouths so we
couldn't talk. When he spoke, he was serious and blunt.
         "I'm not going to sugarcoat anything for you. You're both on happyjuice up to your ears, and
the loss you've sustained isn't going to bother you until I take you off the stuff. For my own
convenience I'm keeping you drugged until you get to Heaven. I have twenty-one amputees to take
care of. We can't handle twenty-one psychiatric cases.
         "Enjoy your peace of mind while you still have it. You two especially, since you'll probably
want to stay together. The prosthetics you get on Heaven will work just fine, but every time you look
at his mechanical leg or you look at her arm, you're going to think of how lucky the other one is.
You're going to constantly trigger memories of pain and loss for each other. . . . You may be at each
other's throats in a week. Or you may share a sullen kind of love for the rest of your lives.
         "Or you may be able to transcend it. Give each other strength. Just don't kid yourselves if it
doesn't work out."
         He checked the readout on each thermometer and made a notation in his notebook. "Doctor
knows best, even if he is a little weird by your own old-fashioned standards. Keep it in mind." He
took the thermometer out of my mouth and gave me a little pat on the shoulder. Impartially, he did
the same to Marygay. At the door, he said, "We've got collapsar insertion in about six hours. One of
the nurses will take you to the tanks."
         We went into the tanks—so much more comfortable and safer than the old individual
acceleration shells— and dropped into the Tet-2 collapsar field already starting the crazy fifty-gee
evasive maneuvers that would protect us from enemy cruisers when we popped out by Aleph-7, a
microsecond later.
        Predictably, the Aleph-7 campaign was a dismal failure, and we limped away from it with a
two-campaign total of fifty-four dead and thirty-nine cripples bound for Heaven. Only twelve soldiers
were still able to fight, but they weren't exactly straining at the leash.
        It took three collapsar jumps to get to Heaven. No ship ever went there directly from a battle,
even though the delay sometimes cost extra lives. It was the one place besides Earth that the Taurans
could not be allowed to find.
        Heaven was a lovely, unspoiled Earth-like world; what Earth might have been like if men had
treated her with compassion instead of lust Virgin forests, white beaches, pristine deserts. The few
dozen cities there either blended perfectly with the environment (one was totally underground) or
were brazen statements of human ingenuity; Oceanus, in a coral reef with six fathoms of water over
its transparent roof; Boreas, perched on a sheared-off mountaintop in the polar wasteland; and the
fabulous Skye, a huge resort city that floated from continent to continent on the trade winds.
        We landed, as everyone does, at the jungle city, Threshold. Three-fourths hospital, if s by far
the planet's largest city, but you couldn't tell that from the air, flying down from orbit. The only sign
of civilization was a short runway that suddenly appeared, a small white patch dwarfed to
insignificance by the stately rain forest that crowded in from the east and an immense ocean that
dominated the other horizon.
        Once under the arboreal cover, the city was very much in evidence. Low buildings of native
stone and wood rested among ten-meter-thick tree trunks. They were connected by unobtrusive stone
paths, with one wide promenade meandering off to the beach. Sunlight filtered down in patches, and
the air held a mixture of forest sweetness and salt tang.
        I later learned that the city sprawled out over 200 square kilometers, that you could take a
subway to anyplace that was too far to walk. The ecology of Threshold was very carefully balanced
and maintained so as to resemble the jungle outside, with all the dangerous and uncomfortable
elements eliminated. A powerful pressor field kept out large predators and such insect life as was not
necessary for the health of the plants inside.
        We walked, limped and rolled into the nearest building, which was the hospital's reception
area. The rest of the hospital was underneath, thirty subterranean stories. Each person was examined
and assigned his own room.
        I tried to get a double with Marygay, but they weren't set up for that.
        "Earth-year" was 2189. So I was 215 years old, God, look at that old codger. Somebody pass
the hat—no, not necessary. The doctor who examined me said that my accumulated pay would be
transferred from Earth to Heaven. With compound interest, I was just shy of being a billionaire. He
remarked that I'd find lots of ways to spend my billion on Heaven.
        They took the most severely wounded first, so it was several days before I went into surgery.
        Afterwards, I woke up in my room and found that they had grafted a prosthesis onto my
stump, an articulated structure of shiny metal that to my untrained eye looked exactly like the
skeleton of a leg and foot. It looked creepy as hell, lying there in a transparent bag of fluid, wires
running out of it to a machine at the end of the bed.
        An aide came in. "How you feelin', sir?" I almost told him to forget the "sir" bullshit, I was
out of the army and staying out this time. But it might be nice for the guy to keep f eeling that I
outranked him.
        "I don't know. Hurts a little."
        "Gonna hurt like a sonuvabitch. Wait'll the nerves start to grow."
        "Nerves?"
        "Sure." He was fiddling with the machine, reading dials on the other side. "How you gonna
have a leg without nerves? It'd just sit there."
         "Nerves? Like regular nerves? You mean I can just think 'move' and the thing moves?"
         "'Course you can." He looked at me quizzically, then went back to his adjustments.
         What a wonder. "Prosthetics has sure come a long way."
         "Pross-what-ics?"
         "You know, artificial—"
         "Oh yeah, like in books. Wooden legs, hooks and stuff."
         How'd he ever get a job? "Yeah, prosthetics. Like this thing on the end of my stump."
         "Look, sir." He set down the clipboard he'd been scribbling on. "You've been away a long
time. That's gonna be a leg, just like the other leg except it can't break."
         "They do it with arms, too?"
         "Sure, any limb." He went back to his writing. "Livers, kidneys, stomachs, all kinds of things.
Still working on hearts and lungs, have to use mechanical substitutes."
         "Fantastic." Marygay would be whole again, too.
         He shrugged. "Guess so. They've been doing it since before I was born. How old are you,
sir?"
         I told him, and he whistled. "God damn. You musta been in it from the beginning." His accent
was very strange. All the words were right but all the sounds were wrong.
         "Yeah. I was in the Epsilon attack. Aleph-null." They'd started naming collapsars after letters
of the Hebrew alphabet, in order of discovery, then ran out of letters when the damn things started
cropping up all over the place. So they added numbers after the letters; last I heard, they were up to
Yod-42.
         "Wow, ancient history. What was it like back then?"
         "I don't know. Less crowded, nicer. Went back to Earth a year ago —hell, a century ago.
Depends on how you look at it. It was so bad I re-enlisted, you know? Bunch of zombies. No
offense."
         He shrugged. "Never been there, myself. People who come from there seem to miss it. Maybe
it got better."
         "What, you were born on another planet? Heaven?" No wonder I couldn't place his accent.
         "Born, raised and drafted." He put the pen back in his pocket and folded the clipboard up to a
wallet-sized package. "Yes, sir. Third-generation angel. Best damned planet in all UNEF." He spelled
it out, didn't say "you-neff" the way I'd always heard it.
         "Look, I've gotta run, lieutenant. Two other monitors to check, this hour." He backed out the
door. "You need anything, there's a buzzer on the table there."
         Third-generation angel. His grandparents came from Earth, probably when I was a young
punk of a hundred. I wondered how many other worlds they'd colonized while my back was turned.
Lose an arm, grow a new one?
         It was going to be good to settle down and live a whole year for every year that went by.
         The guy wasn't kidding about the pain. And it wasn't just the new leg, though that hurt like
boiling oil. For the new tissues to "take," they'd had to subvert my body's resistance to alien cells;
cancer broke out in a half-dozen places and had to be treated separately, painfully.
         I was feeling pretty used up, but it was still kind of fascinating to watch the leg grow. White
threads turned into blood vessels and nerves, first hanging a little slack, then moving into place as the
musculature grew up around the metal bone.
         I got used to seeing it grow, so the sight never repelled me. But when Marygay came to visit,
it was a jolt —she was ambulatory before the skin on her new arm had started to grow; looked like a
walking anatomy demonstration. I got over the shock, though, and she eventually came in for a few
hours every day to play games or trade gossip or just sit and read, her arm slowly growing inside the
plastic cast.
         I'd had skin for a week before they uncased the new leg and trundled the machine away. It
was ugly as hell, hairless and dead white, stiff as a metal rod. But it worked, after a fashion. I could
stand up and shuffle along.
         They transferred me to orthopedics, for "range and motion repatterning"—a fancy name for
slow torture. They strap you into a machine that bends both the old and new legs simultaneously. The
new one resists.
         Marygay was in a nearby section, having her arm twisted methodically. It must have been
even worse on her, she looked gray and haggard every afternoon, when we met to go upstairs and
sunbathe in the broken shade.
         As the days went by, the therapy became less like torture and more like strenuous exercise.
We both began swimming for an hour or so every clear day, in the calm, pressor-guarded water off
the beach. I still limped on land, but in the water I could get around pretty well.
         The only real excitement we had on Heaven—excitement to our combat-blunted sensibilities
—was in that carefully guarded water.
         They have to turn off the pressor field for a split second every time a ship lands; otherwise it
would just ricochet off over the ocean. Every now and then an animal slips in, but the dangerous land
animals are too slow to get through. Not so in the sea.
         The undisputed master of Heaven's oceans is an ugly customer that the angels, in a fit of
originality, named the "shark." It could eat a stack of earth sharks for breakfast, though.
         The one that got in was an average-sized white shark who had been bumping around the edge
of the pressor field for days, tormented by all that protein splashing around inside. Fortunately, there's
a warning siren two minutes before the pressor is shut down, so nobody was in the water when he
came streaking through. And streak through he did, almost beaching himself in the fury of his
fruitless attack.
         He was twelve meters of flexible muscle with a razor-sharp tail at one end and a collection of
arm-length fangs at the other. His eyes, big yellow globes, were set on stalks more than a meter out
from his head. His mouth was so wide that, open, a man could comfortably stand in it. Make an
impressive photo for his heirs.
They couldn't just turn off the pressor field and wait for the thing to swim away. So the Recreation
Committee organized a hunting party.
         I wasn't too enthusiastic about offering myself up as an hors d'oeuvre to a giant fish, but
Marygay had spear-fished a lot as a kid growing up in Florida and was really excited by the prospect.
I went along with the gag when I found out how they were doing it; seemed safe enough.
         These "sharks" supposedly never attack people in boats. Two people who had more faith in
fishermen's stories than I had gone out to the edge of the pressor field in a rowboat, armed only with
a side of beef. They kicked the meat overboard and the shark was there in a flash.
         This was the cue for us to step in and have our fun. There were twenty-three of us fools
waiting on the beach with flippers, masks, breathers and one spear each. The spears were pretty
formidable, though, jet-propelled and with high-explosive heads.
         We splashed in and swam in phalanx, underwater, toward the feeding creature. When it saw
us at first, it didn't attack. It tried to hide its meal, presumably so that some of us wouldn't be able to
sneak around and munch on it while the shark was dealing with the others. But every time he tried for
the deep water, he'd bump into the pressor field. He was obviously getting pissed off.
         Finally, he just let go of the beef, whipped around and charged. Great sport. He was the size
of your finger one second, way down there at the other end of the field, then suddenly as big as the
guy next to you and closing fast.
         Maybe ten of the spears hit him —mine didn't— and they tore him to shreds. But even after
an expert, or lucky, brain shot that took off the top of his head and one eye, even with half his flesh
and entrails scattered in a bloody path behind him, he slammed into our line and clamped his jaws
around a woman, grinding off both of her legs before it occurred to him to die.
         We carried her, barely alive, back to the beach, where an ambulance was waiting. They
poured her full of blood surrogate and No-shock and rushed her to the hospital, where she survived to
eventually go through the agony of growing new legs. I decided that I would leave the hunting of fish
to other fish.
        Most of our stay at Threshold, once the therapy became bearable, was pleasant enough. No
military discipline, lots of reading and things to potter around with. But there was a pall over it, since
it was obvious that we weren't out of the army; just pieces of broken equipment that they were fixing
up to throw back into the fray. Marygay and I each had another three years to serve in our
lieutenancies.
        But we did have six months of rest and recreation coming once our new limbs were
pronounced in good working order. Marygay was released two days before I was but waited around
for me.
        My back pay came to $892,746,012. Not in the form of bales of currency, fortunately; on
Heaven they used an electronic credit exchange, so I carried my fortune around in a little machine
with a digital readout. To buy something you punched in the vendor's credit number and the amount
of purchase; the sum was automatically shuffled from your account to his. The machine was the size
of a slender wallet and coded to your thumbprint
        Heaven's economy was governed by the continual presence of thousands of resting, recreating
millionaire soldiers. A modest snack would cost a hundred bucks, a room for a night at least ten
times that. Since UNEF built and owned Heaven, this runaway inflation was pretty transparently a
simple way of getting our accumulated pay back into the economic mainstream.
        We had fun, desperate fun. We rented a flyer and camping gear and went off for weeks,
exploring the planet. There were icy rivers to swim and lush.jungles to crawl through; meadows and
mountains and polar wastes and deserts.
        We could be totally protected from the environment by adjusting our individual pressor fields
—sleep naked in a buzzard— or we could take nature straight. At Mary-gay's suggestion, the last
thing we did before coming back to civilization was to climb a pinnacle in the desert, fasting for
several days to heighten our sensibilities (or warp our perceptions, I'm still not sure), and sit back-to-
back in the searing heat, contemplating the languid flux of life.
        Then off to the fleshpots. We toured every city on the planet, and each had its own particular
charm, but we finally returned to Skye to spend the rest of our leave time.
        The rest of the planet was bargain-basement compared to Skye. In the four weeks we were
using the airborne pleasure dome as our home base, Marygay and I each went through a good half-
billion dollars. We gambled—sometimes losing a million dollars or more in a night—ate and drank
the finest the planet had to offer, and sampled every service and product that wasn't too bizarre for
our admittedly archaic tastes. We each had a personal servant whose salary was rather more than that
of a major general.
        Desperate fun, as I said. Unless the war changed radically, our chances of surviving the next
three years were microscopic. We were remarkably healthy victims of a terminal disease, trying to
cram a lifetime of sensation into a half of a year.
        We did have the consolation, not small, that however short the remainder of our lives would
be, we would at least be together. For some reason it never occurred to me that even that could be
taken from us.

         We were enjoying a light lunch in the transparent "first floor" of Skye, watching the ocean
glide by underneath us, when a messenger bustled in and gave us two envelopes: our orders.
         Marygay had been bumped to captain, and I to major, on the basis of our military records and
tests we had taken at Threshold. I was a company commander and she was a company's executive
officer.
         But they weren't the same company.
         She was going to muster with a new company being formed right here on Heaven. I was
going back to Star-gate for "indoctrination and education" before taking command.
         For a long tune we couldn't say anything. 'I'm going to protest," I said finally, weakly. "They
can't make me a commander. Into a commander."
         She was still struck dumb. This was not just a separation. Even if the war was over and we
left for Earth only a few minutes apart, in'different ships, the geometry of the collapsar jump would
pile up years between us. When the second one arrived on Earth, his partner would probably be a
half-century older; more probably dead.
We sat there for some time, not touching the exquisite food, ignoring the beauty around us and
beneath us, only conscious of each other and the two sheets of paper that separated us with a gulf as
wide and real as death.
We went back to Threshold. I protested but my arguments were shrugged off. I tried to get Marygay
assigned to my company, as my exec. They said my personnel had all been allotted. I pointed out that
most of them probably hadn't even been born yet. Nevertheless, allotted, they said. It would be almost
a century, I said, before I even get to Stargate. They replied that Strike Force Command plans in
terms of centuries.
         Not in terms of people.
         We had a day and a night together. The less said about that, the better. It wasn't just losing a
lover. Mary-gay and I were each other's only link to real life, the Earth of the 1980s and 90s. Not the
perverse grotesquerie we were supposedly fighting to preserve. When her shuttle took off it was like
a casket rattling down into a grave.
         I commandeered computer time and found out the orbital elements of her ship and its
departure tune; found out I could watch her leave from "our" desert.
         I landed on the pinnacle where we had starved together and, a few hours before dawn,
watched a new star appear over the western horizon, flare to brilliance and fade as it moved away,
becoming just another star, then a dun star, and then nothing. I walked to the edge and looked down
the sheer rock face to the dim frozen rippling of dunes half a kilometer below. I sat with my feet
dangling over the edge, thinking nothing, until the sun's oblique rays illuminated the dunes in a soft,
tempting chiaroscuro of low relief. Twice I shifted my weight as if to jump. When I didn't, it was not
for fear of pain or loss. The pain would be only a bright spark and the loss would be only the army's.
And it would be their ultimate victory over me—having ruled my life for so long, to force an end to
it.
         That much, I owed to the enemy.


MAJOR MANDELLA
2458-3143 A.D.

1
        What was that old experiment they told us about in high school biology? Take a flatworm and
teach it how to swim through a maze. Then mash it up and feed it to a stupid flatworm, and lo! the
stupid flatworm would be able to swim the maze, too.
        I had a bad taste of major general in my mourn.
        Actually, I supposed they had refined the techniques since my high school days. With time
dilation, that was about 450 years for research and development
        At Stargate, my orders said, I was to undergo "indoctrination and education" prior to taking
command of my very own Strike Force. Which was what they still called a company.
        For my education on Stargate, they didn't mince up major generals and serve them to me with
hollandaise. They didn't feed me anything except glucose for three weeks. Glucose and electricity.
        They shaved every hair off my body, gave me a shot that turned me into a dishrag, attached
dozens of electrodes to my head and body, immersed me in a tank of oxygen&ted fluorocarbon, and
hooked me up to an ALSC. That's an "accelerated life situation computer." It kept me busy.
        I guess it took the machine about ten minutes to review everything I had learned previously
about the martial (excuse the expression) arts. Then it started in on the new stuff.
        I learned the best way to use every weapon from a rock to a nova bomb. Not just
intellectually; that's what all those electrodes were for. Cybernetically-controlled negative feedback
kinesthesia; I felt the weapons in my hands and watched my performance with them. And did it over
and over until I did it right. The illusion of reality was total. I used a spear-thrower with a band of
Masai warriors on a village raid, and when I looked down at my body it was long and black. I
releamed epee from a cruel-looking man in foppish clothes, in an eighteenth-century French
courtyard. I sat quietly in a tree with a Sharps rifle and sniped at blue-uniformed men as they crawled
across a muddy field toward Vicksburg. In three weeks I killed several regiments of electronic ghosts.
It seemed more like a year to me, but the ALSC does strange things to your sense of time.
        Learning to use useless exotic weapons was only a small part of the training. In fact, it was
the relaxing part. Because when I wasn't in kinesthesia, the machine kept my body totally inert and
zapped my brain with four mfllenia's worth of military facts and theories. And I couldn't forget any of
it! Not while I was in the tank.
        Want to know who Scipio Aemflianus was? I don't. Bright light of the Third Punic War. War
is the province of danger and therefore courage above all things is the first quality of a warrior, von
Clausewitz maintained. And m never forget the poetry of "the advance party minus normally moves
in a column formation with the platoon headquarters leading, followed by a laser squad, the heavy
weapons squad, and the remaining laser squad; the column relies on observation for its flank security
except when the terrain and visibility dictate the need for small security detachments to the flanks, in
which case the advance party commander will detail one platoon sergeant . . ." and so on. That's from
Strike Force Command Small Unit Leader's Handbook, as if you could call something a handbook
when it takes up two whole microfiche cards, 2,000 pages.
        If you want to become a thoroughly eclectic expert in a subject that repels you, join UNEF
and sign up for officer training.
        One hundred nineteen people, and I was responsible for 118 of them. Counting myself but not
counting the Commodore, who could presumably take care of herself.
        I hadn't met any of my company during the two weeks of physical rehabilitation that followed
the ALSC session. Before our first muster I was supposed to report to the Temporal Orientation
Officer. I called for an appointment and his clerk said the Colonel would meet me at the Level Six
Officers' Club after dinner.
        I went down to Six early, thinking to eat dinner there, but they had nothing but snacks. So I
munched on a fungus thing that vaguely resembled escargots and took the rest of my calories in the
form of alcohol

TABLE OF ORGANIZATION Strike Force Gamma Sade—138 Campaign
1ECHN:          MAJ Mandella            COMM Antopol
2ECHN:          CAPT Moore
3ECHN:          1LT Hilleboe
4ECHN:          2LT Riland
          2LT Rusk
          2LT Alsever MD

5ECHN:         2LT Borgstedt          2LT Brill             2LT Gatnor 2LT Heimoff
6ECHN:         SSgr Webster           SSgt Gilliei          SSgt Abrams SSgt Dole
7ECHN:                Set Doltns              Set Bell             Sgt Anderson Sgt Noyes
               Cpl Geller             Cpl Kahn       Cpl Kalvin    Cpl Spraggs
8ECHN:                Pvt Boas                Cpl Weiner Pvt Muler        Pvt Conroy
               Pvt.Ltageman           Pvt Ikle              Pvt Reisman Pvt Yakata
               Pvt Rosevear          Pvt Schon     Pvt Coupling Pvt Burns
               Pvt Wolfe, R.         Pvt Shubik    Pvt Rostov    Pvt Cohen
               Pvt Lin               Pvt. Duhl     Pvt Hunttegton       Pvt Graham
               Pvt Simmons           Pvt Perloff   Pvt De Sola Pvt Schoellpto
               Pvt Winograd          Pvt Moynihan Pvt Pool       Pvt Wolfe, E.
               Pvt Brown             Pvt Frank     Pvt Nepala    Pvt Karkoshka
               Pvt Bloomquist               Pvt Graubard Pvt Schuba PvtMaJer
               Pvt Wong              Pvt Orlans    Pvt Ulanov Pvt Dioujova
               Pvt Louria            Pvt Mayr             Pvt Shelley Pvt Armaing
               Pvt Gross             Pvt Quarton Pvt Lynn               Pvt Baulez
               Pvt Asadl             Pvt Hin              Pvt Slaer     Pvt Johnson
               Pvt Horman            Pvt Stendahl Pvt Schenk Pvt Orbrecht
               Pvt Fox               Pvt Erikson Pvt Deelstra Pvt Kayibanda
                                     Pvt Bora      Pvt Levy             Pvt Tschudi

Supporting: 1LT Williams (NAV), 2LTs Jarvfl (MED), Laasonen (MED). Wflber (PSY),
Szydlowska (MAINT), Gaptchenko (ORD) Gedo (COMM), Gim (COMP); 1SGTs Evans (MED),
Rodriguez (MED), Kostidinov (MED), Rwabwogo (PSY), Blazynski (MAINT), Turpin (ORD);
SSGTs Carreras (MED), KousnetzoT (MED), Waruinge (MED), Rojas (MED), Botos (MAINT),
Orban (CK), Mbugua (COMP); SGTs Perez (MED), Seales (MAINT), AnghetoT (ORD) Vugin
(COMP); CPLs Daborg (MED), Correa (MED), Kajdi (SEX), Valdez (SEX), Muranga (ORD); PVTs
Kottysch (MAINT), Rudkosld (CK), Minter (ORD).

APPROVED STFCOM STARGATB 12 Mar 2458. FOR THB COMMANDER:
Olga Torischeva BGEN STFCOM


       "Major Mandella?" I'd been busily engaged in my seventh beer and hadn't seen the Colonel
approach. I started to rise but he motioned for me to stay seated and dropped heavily into the chair
opposite me.
       "I'm in your debt," be said. "You saved me from at least half of a boring evening." He offered
his hand. "Jack Kynock, at your service."
       "Colonel—"
       "Don't Colonel me and I won't Major you. We old fossils have to ... keep our perspective.
William."
       "All right with me."
       He ordered a kind of drink I'd never heard of. "Where to start? Last time you were on Earth
was 2007, according to the records."
       "That s right."
       "Didn't like it much, did you?"
       "No." Zombies, happy robots.
       "Well, it got better. Then it got worse, thank you." A private brought his drink, a bubbling
concoction that was green at the bottom of the glass and lightened to chartreuse at the top. He sipped.
"Then they got better again, then worse, then ... I don't know. Cycles."
       "What's it like now?"
       "Well . . . I'm not really sure. Stacks of reports and such, but if s hard to filter out the
propaganda. I haven't been back in almost two hundred years; it was pretty bad then. Depending on
what you like."
       "What do you mean?"
       "Oh, let me see. There was lots of excitement Ever hear of the Pacifist movement?"
         "I don't think so."
         "Hmm, the name's deceptive. Actually, it was a war, a guerilla war."
         "I thought I could give you name, rank and serial number of every war from Troy on up." He
smiled. "They must have missed one."
         "For good reason. It was run by veterans —survivors of Yod-38 and Aleph-40,1 hear; they
got discharged together and decided they could take on all of UNEF, Earthside. They got lots of
support from the population."
         "But didn't win."
         "We're still here." He swirled his drink and the colors shifted. "Actually, all I know is hearsay.
Last time I got to Earth, the war was over, except for some sporadic sabotage. And it wasn't exactly a
safe topic of conversation." .
         "It surprises me a little," I said. "well, more than a little. That Earth's population would do
anything at all ... against the government's wishes."
         He made a noncommittal sound.
         "Least of all, revolution. When we were there, you couldn't get anybody to say a damned
thing against the UNEF —or any of the local governments, for that matter. They were conditioned
from ear to ear to accept things as they were."
         "Ah. That's a cyclic thing, too." He settled back in his chair. "It's not a matter of technique. If
they wanted
to, Earth's government could have total control over ... every nontrivial thought and action of each
citizen, from cradle to grave.
         "They don't do it because it would be fatal. Because there's a war on. Take your own case: did
you get any motivational conditioning while you were in the can?" I thought for a moment. "If I did, I
wouldn't necessarily know about it."
         "That's true. Partially true. But take my word for it, they left that part of your brain alone. Any
change in your attitude toward UNEF or the war, or war in general, comes only from new knowledge.
Nobody's fiddled with your basic motivations. And you should know why."
         Names, dates, figures rattled down through the maze of new knowledge. "Tet-17, Sed-21,
Aleph-14. The Lazlo ... 'The Lazlo Emergency Commission Report.' June, 2106."
         "Right. And by extension, your own experience on Aleph-1. Robots don't make good
soldiers."
         "They would," I said. "Up to the twenty-first century. Behavioural conditioning would have
been the answer to a general's dream. Make up an army with all the best features of the SS, the
Praetorian Guard, the Golden Horde. Mosby's Raiders, the Green Berets."
         He laughed over his glass. "Then put that army up against a squad of men in modern fighting
suits. It'd be over in a couple of minutes."
         "So long as each man in the squad kept his head about him. And just fought like hell to stay
alive." The generation of soldiers that had precipitated the Lazlo Reports had been conditioned from
birth to conform to somebody's vision of the ideal fighting man. They worked beautifully as a team,
totally bloodthirsty, placing no great importance on personal survival —and the Taurans cut them to
ribbons. The Taurans also fought with no regard for self. But they were better at it, and there were
always more of them.
         Kynock took a drink and watched the colors. "I've seen your psych profile," he said. "Both
before you got here and after your session in the can. It's essentially the same, before and after."
         "That's reassuring," I signalled for another beer.
         "Maybe it shouldn't be."
         "What, it says I won't make a good officer? I told them that from the beginning. I'm no
leader."
         "Right in a way, wrong in a way. Want to know what that profile says?"
         I shrugged. "Classified, isn't it?"
        "Yes," he said. "But you're a major now. You can pull the profile of anybody in your
command."
        "I don't suppose it has any big surprises." But I was a little curious. What animal isn't
fascinated by a mirror?
        "No. It says you're a pacifist. A failed one at that, which gives you a mild neurosis. Which
you. handle by transferring the burden of guilt to the army."
        The fresh beer was so cold it hurt my teeth, "No surprises yet"
        "If you had to kill a man, rather than a Tauran, I'm not sure you could do it. Even though you
must know a thousand different ways."
        I didn't know how to answer that. Which probably meant he was right.
        "And as far as being a leader, you do have a certain potential. But it would be along the lines
of a teacher or a minister; you would have to lead from empathy, compassion. You have the desire to
impose your ideas on other people, but not your will. Which means, you're right, you'll make one hell
of a bad officer unless you shape up."
        I had to laugh. "UNEF must have known all of this when they ordered me to officer training."
        "There are other parameters," he said. "For instance, you're adaptable, reasonably intelligent,
analytical. And you're one of the eleven people who's lived through the whole war."
        "Surviving is a virtue in a private." Couldn't resist it "But an officer should provide gallant
example. Go down with the ship. Stride the parapet as if unafraid."
        He harrumphed at that "Not when you're a thousand light years from your replacement"
        "It doesn't add up, though. Why would they haul me all the way from Heaven to take a chance
on my 'shaping up,' when probably a third of the people here on Stargate are better officer material?
God, the military mind!"
        "I suspect the bureaucratic mind, at least, had something to do with it. You have an
embarrassing amount of seniority to be a footsoldier."
        "That's all time dilation. I've only been in three campaigns."
        "Immaterial. Besides, that's two-and-a-half more than the average soldier survives. The
propaganda boys will probably make you into some kind of a folk hero."
        "Folk hero." I sipped at the beer. "Where is John Wayne now that we really need him?"
        "John Wayne?" He shook his head. "I never went in the can, you know. I'm no expert at
military history."
        "Forget it"
        Kynock finished his drink and asked the private to get him—I swear to God—a "rum
Antares."
        "Well, I'm supposed to be your Temporal Orientation Officer. What do you want to know
about the present? What passes for the present."
        Still on my mind: "You've never been in the can?"
        "No, combat officers only. The computer facilities and energy you go through in three weeks
would keep the Earth running for several days. Too expensive for us desk-warmers."