        "Your decorations say you're combat."
        "Honorary. I was." The rum Antares was a tall slender glass with a little ice floating at the
top, filled with pale amber liquid. At the bottom was a bright red globule about the size of a
thumbnail; crimson filaments waved up from it.
        "What's that red stuff?"
        "Cinnamon. Oh, some ester with cinnamon in it. Quite good . . . want a taste?"
        "No, I'll stick to beer, thanks."
        "Down at level one, the library machine has a temporal orientation file, that my staff updates
every day. You can go to it for specific questions. Mainly I want to ... prepare you for meeting your
Strike Force."
        "What, they're all cyborgs? Clones?"
        He laughed. "No, it's illegal to clone humans. The main problem is with, uh, you're
heterosexual."
        "Oh, that's no problem. I'm tolerant."
        "Yes, your profile shows that you . . . think you're tolerant, but that's not the problem,
exactly."
        "Oh," I knew what he was going to say. Not the details, but the substance.
        "Only emotionally stable people are drafted into UNEF. I know this is hard for you to accept,
but hetero-sexuality is considered an emotional dysfunction. Relatively easy to cure."
        "If they think they're going to cure me—"
        "Relax, you're too old." He took a delicate sip. "It won't be as hard to get along with them as
you might—"
        "Wait. You mean nobody . . . everybody in my company is homosexual? But me?"
        "William, everybody on Earth is homosexual. Except for a thousand or so; veterans and
incurables."
        "Ah." What could I say? "Seems like a drastic way to solve the population problem."
        "Perhaps. It does work, though; Earth's population is stable at just under a billion. When one
person dies or goes offplanet, another is quickened."
        "Not 'born:'"
        "Born, yes, but not the old-fashioned way. Your old term for it was 'test-tube babies,' but of
course they don't use a test-tube."
        "Well, thaf s something."
        "Part of every crèche is an artificial womb that takes care of a person the first eight or ten
months after quickening. What you would call birth takes place over a period of days; it isn't the
sudden, drastic event that it used to be."
        O brave new world, I thought. "No birth trauma. A billion perfectly adjusted homosexuals."
        "Perfectly adjusted by present-day Earth standards. You and I might find them a little odd."
        "That's an understatement." I drank off the rest of my beer. "Yourself, you, uh . . . are you
homosexual?"
        "Oh, no," he said. I relaxed. "Actually, though, I'm not hetero any more, either." He slapped
his hip and it made an odd sound. "Got wounded and it turned out that I had a rare disorder of the
lymphatic system, can't regenerate. Nothing but metal and plastic from the waist down. To use your
word, I'm a cyborg."
        Far out, as my mother used to say. "Oh, Private," I called to the waiter, "bring me one of those
Antares things." Sitting here in a bar with an asexual cyborg who is probably the only other normal
person on the whole god-damned planet.
        "Make it a double, please."

2
        They looked normal enough, filing into the lecture hall where we held our first muster, the
next day. Rather young and a little stiff.
        Most of them had only been out of the crèche for seven or eight years. The crèche was a
controlled, isolated environment to which only a few specialists—pediatricians and teachers, mostly
—had access. When a person leaves crèche at age twelve or thirteen, he chooses a first name (his last
name having been taken from the donor-parent with the higher genetic rating) and is legally a
probationary adult, with schooling about equivalent to what I had after my first year of college. Most
of them go on to more specialized education, but some are assigned a job and go right to work.
        They're observed very closely and anyone who shows any signs of sociopathy, such as
heterosexual leanings, is sent away to a correctional facility. He's either cured or kept there for the
rest of his life.
        Everyone is drafted into UNEF at the age of twenty. Most people work at a desk for five years
and are discharged. A few lucky souls, about one in eight thousand, are invited to volunteer for
combat training. Refusing is "sociopathic," even though it means signing up for an extra five years.
And your chance of surviving the ten years is so small as to be negligible; nobody ever had. Your
best chance is to have the war end before your ten (subjective) years of service are up. Hope that time
dilation puts many years between each of your battles.
         Since you can figure on going into battle roughly once every subjective year, and since an
average of 34 percent survive each battle, it's easy to compute your chances of being able to fight it
out for ten years. It comes to about two one-thousandths of one percent. Or, to put it another way, get
an old-fashioned six-shooter and play Russian Roulette with four of the six chambers loaded. If you
can do it ten times in a row without decorating the opposite wall, congratulations! You're a civilian.
         There being some sixty thousand combat soldiers in UNEF, you could expect about 1.2 of
them to survive for ten years. I didn't seriously plan on being the lucky one, even though I was
halfway there.
         How many of these young soldiers filing into the auditorium knew they were doomed? I tried
to match faces up with the dossiers I'd been scanning all morning, but it was hard. They'd all been
selected through the same battery of stringent parameters, and they looked remarkably alike: tall but
not too tall, muscular but not heavy, intelligent but not in a brooding way . . . and Earth was much
more racially homogeneous than it had been in my century. Most of them looked vaguely Polynesian.
Only two of them, Kayibanda and Lin, seemed pure representatives of racial types. I wondered
whether the others gave them a hard time.
         Most of the women were achingly handsome, but I was in no position to be critical. I'd been
celibate for over a year, ever since saying goodbye to Marygay, back on Heaven.
         I wondered if one of them might have a trace of atavism, or might humor her commander's
eccentricity. It is absolutely forbidden for an officer to form sexual liaison with his subordinates.
Such a warm way of putting it. Violation of this regulation is punishable by attachment of all funds
and reduction to the rank of private or, if the relationship interferes with a units combat efficiency,
summary execution. if all of UNEFs regulations could be broken so casually and consistently as that
one was, it would be a very easygoing army.
         But not one of the boys appealed to me. How they'd look after another year, I wasn't sure.
         "Tench-hut!" That was Lieutenant Hilleboe. It was a credit to my new reflexes that I didn't
jump to my feet Everybody in the auditorium snapped to.
         "My name is Lieutenant Hilleboe and I am your Second Field Officer." That used to be "Field
First Sergeant." A good sign that an army has been around too long is that it starts getting top-heavy
with officers.
         Hilleboe came on like a real hard-ass professional soldier. Probably shouted orders at the
mirror every morning, while she was shaving. But I'd seen her profile and knew that she'd only been
in action once, and only for a couple of minutes at that. Lost an arm and a leg and was
commissioned, same as me, as a result of the tests they give at the regeneration clinic.
         Hell, maybe she had been a very pleasant person before going through that trauma; it was bad
enough just having one limb regrown.
         She was giving them the usual first-sergeant peptalk, stern-but-fair: don't waste my time with
little things, use the chain of command, most problems can be solved at the fifth echelon.
         It made me wish I'd had more time to talk with her earlier. Strike Force Command had really
rushed us into this first muster—we were scheduled to board ship the next day—and I'd only had a
few words with my officers.
         Not enough, because it was becoming clear that Hilleboe and I had rather disparate
philosophies about how to run a company. It was true that running it was her job; I only commanded.
But she was setting up a potential "good guy-bad guy" situation, using the chain of command to so
isolate herself from the men and women under her. I had planned not to be quite so aloof, setting ,
aside an hour every other day when any soldier could come to me directly with grievances or
suggestions without permission from his superiors.
        We had both been given the same information during our three weeks in the can. It was
interesting that we'd arrived at such different conclusions about leadership. This Open Door policy,
for instance, had shown good results in "modern" armies in Australia and America. And it seemed
especially appropriate to our situation, in I which everybody would be cooped up for months or even
years at a time. We'd used the system on the Sangre y Victoria, the last starship to which I'd been
attached, and it had seemed to keep tensions down.
        She had them at ease while delivering this organizational harangue; pretty soon she'd call
them to attention and introduce me. What would I talk about? I'd planned just to say a few
predictable words and explain my Open Door policy, then turn them over to Commodore Antopol,
who would say something about the Masaryk 11. But I'd better put off my explanation until after I'd
had a long talk with Hilleboe; in fact, it would be best if she were the one to introduce the policy to
the men and women, so it wouldn't look like the two of us were at loggerheads.
        My executive officer, Captain Moore, saved me. He came rushing through a side door —he
was always rushing, a pudgy meteor— threw a quick salute and handed me an envelope that
contained our combat orders. I had a quick whispered conference with the Commodore, and she
agreed that it wouldn't do any harm to tell them where we were going, even though the rank and file
technically didn't have the "need to know."
        One thing we didn't have to worry about in this war was enemy agents. With a good coat of
paint, a Tauran might be able to disguise himself as an ambulatory mushroom. Bound to raise
suspicions.
        Hilleboe had called them to attention and was dutifully telling them what a good commander
I was going to be; that I'd been in the war from the beginning, and if they intended to survive through
their enlistment they had better follow my example. She didn't mention that I was a mediocre soldier
with a talent for getting missed. Nor that I'd resigned from the army at the earliest opportunity and
only got back in because conditions on Earth were so intolerable.
        "Thank you, Lieutenant." I took her place at the podium. "At ease." I unfolded the single sheet
mat had our orders, and held it up. "I have some good news and some bad news." What had been a
joke five centuries before was now just a statement of fact
        "These are our combat orders for the Sade-138 campaign. The good news is that we probably
won't be fighting, not immediately. The bad news is that we're going to be a target"
        They stirred a little bit at that, but nobody said anything or took his eyes off me. Good
discipline. Or maybe just fatalism; I didn't know how realistic a picture they had of their future. Their
lack of a future, that is.
        "What we are ordered to do ... is to find the largest portal planet orbiting the Sade-138
collapsar and build a base there. Then stay at the base until we are relieved. That will be two or three
years, probably.
        "During that time we will almost certainly be attacked. As most of you probably know, Strike
Force Command has uncovered a pattern in the enemy's movements from collapsar to collapsar. They
hope eventually to trace this complex pattern back through time and space and find the Taurans'
home planet. For the present, they can only send out intercepting forces, to hamper the enemy's
expansion.
        "In a large perspective, this is what we're ordered to do. We'll be one of several dozen strike
forces employed in these blocking maneuvers, on the enemy's frontier. I won't be able to stress often
enough or hard enough how important this mission is —if UNEF can keep the enemy from
expanding, we may be able to envelope him. And win the war."
        Preferably before we're all dead meat. "One thing I want to be clear: we may be attacked the
day we land, or we may simply occupy the planet for ten years and come on home." Fat chance.
"Whatever happens, every one of us will stay in the best fighting trim all the time. In transit, we will
maintain a regular program of calisthenics as well as a review of our training. Especially construction
techniques—we have to set up the base and its defense facilities in the shortest possible time."
         God, I was beginning to sound like an officer. "Any questions?" There were none. "Then I'd
like to introduce Commodore Antopol. Commodore?"
         The Commodore didn't try to hide her boredom as she outlined, to this room full of ground-
pounders, the characteristics and capabilities of Masaryk II. I had learned most of what she was
saying through the can's force-feeding, but the last thing she said caught my attention.
         "Sade-138 will be the most distant collapsar men have gone to. It isn't even in the galaxy
proper, but rather is part of the Large Magellanic Ooud, some 150,000 light years distant.
         "Our voyage will require four collapsar jumps and will last some four months, subjective.
Maneuvering into collapsar insertion will put us about three hundred years behind Stargate's calendar
by the time we reach Sade-138."
         And another seven hundred years gone, if I lived to return. Not that it would make that much
difference; Marygay was as good as dead and there wasn't another person alive who meant anything
to me.
         "As the major said, you mustn't let these figures lull you into complacency. The enemy is also
headed for Sade-138; we may all get there the same day. The mathematics of the situation is
complicated, but take our word for it; it's going to be a close race.
         "Major, do you have anything more for them?"
         I started to rise. "Well . . ."
         '"Tench-hutl" Hilleboe shouted. Had to learn to expect that.
         "Only that I'd like to meet with my senior officers, echelon 4 and above, for a few minutes.
Platoon sergeants, you're responsible for getting your troops to Staging Area 67 at 0400 tomorrow
morning. Your time's your own until then. Dismissed."
         I invited the five officers up to my billet and brought out a bottle of real French brandy. It had
cost two months' pay, but what else could I do with the money? Invest it?
         I passed around glasses but Alsever, the doctor, demurred. Instead she broke a little capsule
under her nose and inhaled deeply. Then tried without too much success to mask her euphoric
expression.
         "First let's get down to one basic personnel problem," I said, pouring. "Do all of you know
that I'm not homosexual?"
         Mixed chorus of yes sirs and no sirs.
         "Do you think this is going to ... complicate my situation as commander? As far as die rank
and file?"
         "Sir, I don't—" Moore began.
         "No need for honorifics," I said, "not in this closed circle; I was a private four years ago, in
my own time frame. When there aren't any troops around, I'm just Mandella, or William." I had a
feeling that was a mistake even as I was saying it. "Go on."
         "Well, William," he continued, "it might have been a problem a hundred years ago. You
know how people felt then."
         "Actually, I don't. All I know about the period from the twenty-first century to the present is
military history."
         "Oh. Well, it was, uh, it was, how to say it?" His hands fluttered.
         "It was a crime," Alsever said laconically. "That was when the Eugenics Council was first
getting people used to the idea of universal homosex."
         "Eugenics Council?"
         "Part of UNEF. Only has authority on Earth." She took a deep sniff at the empty capsule.
"The idea was to keep people from making babies the biological way. Because, A, people showed a
regrettable lack of sense in choosing their genetic partner. And B, the Council saw that racial
differences had an unnecessarily divisive effect on humanity; with total control over births, they
could make everybody the same race in a few generations."
         I didn't know they had gone quite that far. But I suppose it was logical. "You approve? As a
doctor."
         "As a doctor? I'm not sure." She took another capsule from her pocket and rolled it between
thumb and forefinger, staring at nothing. Or something the rest of us couldn't see. "In a way, it makes
my job simpler. A lot of diseases simply no longer exist. But I don't think they know as much about
genetics as they think they do It's not an exact science; they could be doing something very wrong,
and the results wouldn't show up for centuries."
         She cracked the capsule under her nose and took two deep breaths. "As a woman, though, I'm
all in favor of it" Hilleboe and Rusk nodded vigorously.
         "Not having to go through childbirth?"
         "That's part of it" She crossed her eyes comically, looking at the capsule, gave it a final sniff.
"Mostly, though, it's not . . . having to ... have a man. Inside me. You understand. It's disgusting."
         Moore laughed. "If you haven't tried it, Diana, don't—"
         "Oh, shut up." She threw the empty capsule at him playfully.
         "But it's perfectly natural," I protested.
         "So is swinging through trees. Digging for roots with a blunt stick. Progress, my good major;
progress."
         "Anyway," Moore said, "it was only a crime for a short period. Then it was considered a, oh,
curable . . ."
         "Dysfunction," Alsever said.
         "Thank you. And now, well, it's so rare ... I doubt that any of the men and women have any
strong feelings about it, one way or the other."
         "Just an eccentricity," Diana said, magnanimously. "Not as if you ate babies."
         "That's right, Mandella," Hilleboe said. "I don't feel any differently toward you because of it."
         "I'm glad." That was just great. It was dawning on me that I had not the slightest idea of how
to conduct myself socially. So much of my "normal" behavior was based on a complex unspoken
code of sexual etiquette. Was I .suppose to treat the men like women, and vice versa? Or treat
everybody like brothers and sisters? It was all very confusing.
         I finished off my glass and set it down. "Well, thanks for your reassurances. That was mainly
what I wanted to ask you about . . . I'm sure you all have things to do, goodbyes and such. Don't let
me hold you prisoner."
         They all wandered off except for Charlie Moore. He and I decided to go on a monumental
bulge, trying to hit every bar and officer's club in the sector. We managed twelve and probably could
have hit them all, but I decided to get a few hours' sleep before the next day's muster.
         The one time Charlie made a pass at me, he was very polite about it. I hoped my refusal was
also polite —but figured I'd be getting lots of practice.

3
        UNEF's first starships had been possessed of a kind of spidery, delicate beauty. But with
various technological improvements, structural strength became more important than conserving
mass (one of the old ships would have folded up like an accordian if you'd tried a twenty-five-gee
maneuver), and that was reflected in the design: stolid, heavy, functional-looking. The only
decoration was the name MASARYK II, stenciled in dull blue letters across the obsidian hull.
        Our shuttle drifted over the name on its way to the loading bay, and mere was a crew of tiny
men and women doing maintenance on the hull. With them as a reference, we could see that the
letters were a good hundred meters tall. The ship was over a kilometer long (1036.5 meters, my latent
memory said), and about a third that wide (319.4 meters).
        That didn't mean there was going to be plenty of elbow-room. In its belly, the ship held six
large tachyon-drive fighters and fifty robot drones. The infantry was tucked off in a corner. War is the
province of friction, Chuck von Clausewitz said; I had a feeling we were going to put him to the test.
         We had about six hours before going into the acceleration tank. I dropped my kit in the tiny
billet that would be my home for the next twenty months and went off to explore.
Charlie had beaten me to the lounge and to the privilege of being first to evaluate the quality of
Marsaryk IFs coffee.
         "Rhinocerous bile," he said.
         "At least it isn't soya," I said, taking a first cautious sip. Decided I might be longing for soya
in a week.
         The officers' lounge was a cubicle about three meters by four, metal floor and walls, with a
coffee machine and a library readout Six hard chairs and a table with a typer on it.
         "Jolly place, isn't it?" He idly punched up a general index on the library machine. "Lots of
military theory."
         "That's good. Refresh our memories."
         "Sign up for officer training?"
         "Me? No. Orders."
         "At least you have an excuse." He slapped the on-off button and watched the green spot
dwindle. "I signed, up. They didn't tell me it'd feel like this."
         "Yeah." He wasn't talking about any subtle problem: burden of responsibility or anything.
"They say it wears off, a little at a time." All of that information they force into you; a constant silent
whispering.
         "Ah, there you are." Hilleboe came through the door and exchanged greetings with us. She
gave the room a quick survey, and it was obvious that the Spartan arrangements met with her
approval. "Will you be wanting to address the company before we go into the acceleration tanks?"
         "No, I don't see why that would be ... necessary." I almost said "desirable." The art of
chastising subordinates is a delicate art. I could see that I'd have to keep reminding Hilleboe that she
wasn't in charge.
         Or I could just switch insignia with her. Let her experience the joys of command.
         "You could, please, round up all platoon leaders and go over the immersion sequence with
them. Eventually we'll be doing speed drills. But for now, I think the troops could use a few hours'
rest" If they were as bung-over as their commander.
         "Yes, sir." She turned and left. A little miffed, because what I'd asked her to do should
properly have been a job for Riland or Rusk.
         Charlie eased his pudgy self into one of the hard chairs and sighed. "Twenty months on this
greasy machine. With her. Shit."
         "Well, if you're nice to me, I won't billet the two of you together."
         "All right. I'm your slave forever. Starting, oh, next Friday." He peered into his cup and
decided against drinking the dregs. "Seriously, she's going to be a problem. What are you going to do
with her?"
         "I don't know." Charlie was being insubordinate, too, of course. But he was my XO and out of
the chain of command. Besides, I had to have one friend. "Maybe she'll mellow, once we're under
weigh."
         "Sure." Technically, we were already under weigh, crawling toward the Stargate collapsar at
one gee. But that was only for the convenience of the crew; it's hard to batten down the hatches in
free fall. The trip wouldn't really start until we were in the tanks.
         The lounge was too depressing, so Charlie and I used the remaining hours of mobility to
explore the ship.
         The bridge looked like any other'computer facility; they had dispensed with the luxury of
viewscreens. We stood at a respectful distance while Antopol and her officers went through a last
series of checks before climbing into the tanks and leaving our destiny to the machines.
         Actually, there was a porthole, a thick plastic bubble, in the navigation room forward.
Lieutenant Williams wasn't busy, the pre-insertion part of his job being fully automated, so he was
glad to show us around.
        He tapped the porthole with a fingernail. "Hope we don't have to use this, this trip."
        "How so?" Charlie said.
        "We only use it if we get lost." If the insertion angle was off by a thousandth of a radian, we
were liable to wind up on the other side of the galaxy. "We can get a rough idea of our position by
analyzing the spectra of the brightest stars. Thumbprints. Identify three and we can triangulate."
        "Then find the nearest collapsar and get back on the track," I said.
        "That's the problem. Sade-138 is the only collapsar we know of in the Magellanic Clouds. We
know of it only because of captured enemy data. Even if we could find another collapsar, assuming
we got lost in the cloud, we wouldn't know how to insert."
        "That's great."
        "It's not as though we'd be actually lost," he said with a rather wicked expression. "We could
zip up in the tanks, aim for Earth and blast away at full power. We'd get there in about three months,
ship time."
        "Sure," I said. "But 150,000 years in the future." At twenty-five gees, you get to nine-tenths
the speed of light in less than a month. From then on, you're in the arms of Saint Albert
        "Well, that is a drawback," he said. "But at least we'd find out who'd won the war."
        It made you wonder how many soldiers had gotten out of the war in just that way. There were
forty-two strike forces lost somewhere and unaccounted for. It wats possible that all of them were
crawling through normal space at near-lightspeed and would show up at Earth or Stargate one-by-one
over the centuries.
        A convenient way to go AWOL, since once you were put of the chain of collapsar jumps
you'd be practically impossible to track down. Unfortunately, your jump sequence was pre-
programmed by Strike Force Command; the human navigator only came into the picture if a
miscalculation slipped you into the wrong "worm-hole," and you popped out in some random part of
space.
        Charlie and I went on to inspect the gym, which was big enough for about a dozen people at a
time. I asked him to make up a roster so that everyone could work out for an hour each day when we
were out of the tanks.
        The mess area was only a little larger than the gym —even with four staggered shifts, the
meals would be shoulder-to-shoulder af airs—and the enlisted men and women's lounge was even
more depressing than the officers'. I was going to have a real morale problem on my hands long
before the twenty months were up.
        The armorer's bay was as large as the gym, mess hall and both lounges put together. It had to
be, because the great variety of infantry weapons that had evolved over the centuries. The basic
weapon was still the fighting suit, though it was much more sophisticated than that first model I had
been squeezed into, just before the Aleph-Null campaign.
        Lieutenant Rand, the armory officer, was supervising his four subordinates, one from each
platoon, who were doing a last-minute check of weapons storage. Probably the most important job on
the whole ship, when you contemplate what could happen to all those tons of explosives and
radioactives under twenty-five gees.
        I returned his perfunctory salute. "Everything going all right, Lieutenant?"
        "Yessir, except for those damned swords." For use in the stasis field. "No way we can orient
them that they won't be bent Just hope they don't break."
        I couldn't begin to understand the principles behind the stasis field; the gap between present-
day physics and my master's degree in the same subject was as long as the time that separated Galileo
and Einstein. But I knew the effects.
        Nothing could move at greater man 16.3 meters per second inside the field, which was a
hemispherical (in space, spherical) volume about fifty meters in radius. Inside, there was no such
thing as electromagnetic radiation; no electricity, no magnetism, no light From inside your suit, you
could see your surroundings in ghostly monochrome—which phenomenon was glibly explained to
me as being due to "phase transference of quasi-ener-gy leaking through from an adjacent tachyon
reality," so much phlogiston to me.
The result of it, though, was to make all conventional weapons of warfare useless. Even a nova bomb
was just an inert lump inside the field. And any creature, Terran or Tauran, caught inside the field
without the proper insulation would die in a fraction of a second.
         At first it looked as though we had come upon the ultimate weapon. There were five
engagements where whole Tauran bases were wiped out without any human ground casualties. All
you had to do was carry the field to the enemy (four husky soldiers could handle it in Earth-gravity)
and watch them die as they slipped in through the field's opaque wall. The people carrying the
generator were invulnerable except for the short periods when they might have to turn the thing off to
get their bearings.
         The sixth time the field was used, though, the Taurans were ready for it. They wore protective
suits and were armed with sharp spears, with which they could breach the suits of the generator-
carriers. From then on the carriers were armed.
         Only three other such battles had been reported, although a dozen strike forces had gone out
with the stasis field. The others were still fighting, or still enroute, or had been totally defeated. There
was no way to tell unless they came back. And they weren't encouraged to come back if Taurans were
still in control of "their" real estate —supposedly that constituted "desertion under fire," which meant
execution for all officers (although rumor had it that they were simply brainwiped, imprinted and sent
back into the fray).
         "Will we be using the stasis field, sir?" Riland asked.
         "Probably. Not at first, not unless the Taurans are already there. I don't relish the thought of
living in a suit, day in and day out." Neither did I relish the thought of using sword, spear, throwing
knife; no matter how many electronic illusions I'd sent to Valhalla with them.
         Checked my watch. "Well, we'd better get on down to the tanks, Captain. Make sure
everything's squared away." We had about two hours before the insertion sequence would start.
         The room the tanks were in resembled a huge chemical factory; the floor was a good hundred
meters in diameter and jammed with bulky apparatus painted a uniform, dull gray. The eight tanks
were arranged almost symmetrically around the central elevator, the symmetry spoiled by the fact that
one of the tanks was twice the size of the others. That would be the command tank, for all the senior
officers and supporting specialists.
         Sergeant Blazynski stepped out from behind one of the tanks and saluted. I didn't return his
salute.
         "What the hell is that?" In all that universe of gray, there was one spot of color.
         "It's a cat, sir."
         "Do tell." A big one, too, and bright calico. It looked ridiculous, draped over the sergeant's
shoulder. "Let me rephrase the question: what the hell is a cat doing here?"
         "It's the maintenance squad's mascot, sir." The cat raised its head enough to hiss half-
heartedly at me, then returned to its flaccid repose.
         I looked at Charlie and he shrugged back. "It seems kind of cruel,'' he said. To the sergeant:
"You won't get much use of it After twenty-five gees, it'll be just so much fur and guts."
         "Oh no, sir! Sirs." He ruffed back the fur between the creature's shoulders. It had a
fluorocarbon fitting imbedded there, just like the one above my hipbone. "We bought ft at a store on
Stargate, already modified. Lots of ships have them now, sir. The Commodore signed the forms for
us."
         Well, that was her right; maintenance was under both . of us equally. And it was her ship.
"You couldn't have gotten a dog?" God, I hated cats. Always sneaking around.
"No, sir they don't adapt. Can't take free fall." "Did you have to make any special adaptations? In the
tank?" Charlie asked.
        "No, sir. We had an extra couch." Great; that meant I'd be sharing a tank with the animal. "We
only had to shorten the straps.
        "It takes a different kind of drug for the cell-wall strengthening, but that was included in the
price."
        Charlie scratched it behind an ear. It purred softly but didn't move, "Seems land of stupid. The
animal, I mean."
        "We drugged him ahead of time." No wonder it was so inert; the drug slows your metabolism
down to a rate barely adequate to sustain life. "Makes it easier to strap him in."
        "Guess it's all right," I said. Maybe good for morale. "But if it starts getting in the way, 111
personally recycle it"
        "Yes, sir!" he said, visibly relieved, thinking that I couldn't really do anything like that to such
a cute bundle of fur. Try me, buddy.
        So we had seen it all. The only thing left, this side of the engines, was the huge hold where
the fighters and drones waited, clamped in their massive cradles against the coming acceleration.
Charlie and I went down to take a look, but there were no windows on our side of the airlock. I knew
there'd be one on the inside, but the chamber was evacuated, and it wasn't worth going through the
fill-and-warm cycle merely to satisfy our curiosity.
        I was starting to feel really supernumerary. Called Hilleboe and she said everything was under
control. With an hour to kill, we went back to the lounge and had the computer mediate a game of
Kriegspieler, which was just starting to get interesting when the ten-minute warning sounded.
        The acceleration tanks had a "half-life-to-failure" of five weeks; there was a fifty-fifty chance
that you could stay immersed for five weeks before some valve or tube popped and you were
squashed like a bug underfoot. In practice, it had to be one hell of an emergency to justify using the
tanks for more than two weeks' acceleration. We were only going under for ten days, this first leg of
our journey.
        Five weeks or five hours, though, it was all the same as far as the tankee was concerned. Once
the pressure got up to an operational level, you had no sense of the passage of time. Your body and
brain were concrete. None of your senses provided any input, and you could amuse yourself for
several hours just trying to spell your own name.
        So I wasn't really surprised that no time seemed to have passed when I was suddenly dry, my
body tingling with the return of sensation. The place sounded like an asthmatics' convention in the
middle of a hay field: thirty-nine people and one cat all coughing and sneezing to get rid of the last
residues of fluorocarbon. While I was fumbling with my straps, the side door opened, flooding the
tank with painfully bright light. The cat was the first one out, with a general scramble right behind
him. For the sake of dignity, I waited until last.
        Over a hundred people were milling around outside, stretching and massaging out cramps.
Dignity!        Surrounded by acres of young female flesh, I stared into their faces and desperately
tried to solve a third-order differential equation in my head, to circumvent the gallant reflex. A
temporary expedient, but it got me to the elevator.
        Hilleboe was shouting orders, getting people lined up, and as the doors closed I noticed that
all of one platoon had a uniform light bruise, from head to foot. Twenty pairs of black eyes. I'd have
to see both Maintenance and Medical about that
        After I got dressed.

4
       We stayed at one gee for three weeks, with occasional periods of free fall for navigation
check, while the Masaryk II made a long, narrow loop away from the collapsar Resh-10, and back
again. That period went all right, the people adjusting pretty well to ship routine. I gave them a
minimum of busy-work and a maximum of training review and exercise —for their own good,
though I wasn't naive enough to think they'd see it that way.
         After about a week of one gee, Private Rudkoski (the cook's assistant) had a still, producing
some eight liters a day of 95 percent ethyl alcohol. I didn't want to stop him —life was cheerless
enough; I didn't mind as long as people showed up for duty sober— but I was damned curious both
how he managed to divert the raw materials out of our sealed-tight ecology, and how the people paid
for their booze. So I used the chain of command in reverse, asking Alsever to find out. She asked
Jarvil, who asked Carreras, who sat down with Orban, the cook. Turned out that Sergeant Orban had
set the whole thing up, letting Rudkoski do the dirty work, and was aching to brag about it to a
trustworthy person.
         If I had ever taken meals with the enlisted men and women, I might have figured out that
something odd was going on. But the scheme didn't extend up to officers' country.
         Through Rudkoski, Orban had juryrigged a ship-wide economy based on alcohol. It went like
this:
         Each meal was prepared with one very sugary desert —jelly, custard or flan—which you were
free to eat if you could stand the cloying taste. But if it was still on your tray when you presented it at
the recycling window, Rudkoski would give you a ten-cent chit and scrape the sugary stuff into a
fermentation vat. He had two twenty-liter vats, one "working" while the other was being filled.
         The ten-cent chit was at the bottom of a system that allowed you to buy half-liter of straight
ethyl (with your choice of flavoring) for five dollars. A squad of five people who skipped all of their
desserts could buy about a liter a week, enough for a party but not enough to constitute a public
health problem.
         When Diana brought me this information, she also brought a bottle of Rudkoski's Worst —
literally; it was a flavor that just hadn't worked. It came up through the chain of command with only a
few centimeters missing.
         Its taste was a ghastly combination of strawberry and caraway seed. With a perversity not
uncommon to people who rarely drink, Diana loved it. I had some ice water brought up, and she got
totally blasted within an hour. For myself, I made one drink and didn't finish it
         When she was more than halfway to oblivion, mumbling a reassuring soliloquy to her liver,
she suddenly tilted her head up to stare at me with childlike directness.
         "You have a real problem, Major William."
         "Not half the problem you'll have in the morning, Lieutenant Doctor Diana."
         "Oh not really." She waved a drunken hand in front of her face. "Some vitamins, some glu . . .
cose, an eensy cc of adren . . . aline if all else fails. You . . . you . . . have ... a real . . . problem."
         "Look, Diana, don't you want me to—"
         "What you need ... is to get an appointment with that nice Corporal Valdez." Valdez was the
male sex counselor. "He has empathy. Itsiz job. He'd make you—
         "We talked about this before, remember? I want to stay the way I am."
         "Don't we all." She wiped away a tear that was probably one percent alcohol. "You know they
call you the Old C'reer. No they don't."
         She looked at the floor and then at the wall. "The OT Queer, that's what."
         I had expected names worse than that. But not so soon. "I don't care. The commander
always gets names."
         "I know but." She stood up suddenly and wobbled a little bit. "Too much t' drink. Lie down."
She turned her back to me and stretched so hard that a joint popped. Then a seam whispered open
and she shrugged off her tunic, stepped out of it.and tiptoed to my bed. She sat down and patted the
mattress. "Come on, William. Only chance."
         "For Christ's sake, Diana. It wouldn't be fair."
         "All's fair," she giggled. "And 'sides, I'm a doctor. I can be clin'cal; won't bother me a bit.
Help me with this." After five hundred years, they were still putting brassiere clasps in the back.
         One kind of gentleman would have helped her get undressed and then made a quiet exit.
Another kind of gentleman might have bolted for the door. Being neither kind, I closed in for the kill.
        Perhaps fortunately, she passed out before we had made any headway. I admired the sight and
touch of her for a long time before, feeling like a cad, I managed to gamer everything up and dress
her.
        I lifted her out of the bed, sweet burden, and then realized that if anyone saw me carrying her
down to her billet, she'd be the butt of rumors for the rest of the campaign. I called up Charlie, told
him we'd had some booze and Diana was rather the worse for it, and asked him whether he'd come up
for a drink and help me haul the good doctor home.
        By the time Charlie knocked, she was draped innocently in a chair, snoring softly.
        He smiled at her. "Physician, heal thyself." I offered him the bottle, with a warning. He
sniffed it and made a face.
        "What is this, varnish?"
        "Just something the cooks whipped up. Vacuum still."
        He set it down carefully, as if it might explode if jarred. "I predict a coming shortage of
customers. Epidemic of death by poisoning—she actually drank that vile stuff?"
        "Well, the cooks admitted it was an experiment that didn't pan out; their other flavors are
evidently potable. Yeah, she loved it."
        "Well ..." He laughed. "Damn! What, you take her legs and I take her arms?"
        "No, look, we each take an arm. Maybe we can get her to do part of the walking."
        She moaned a little when we lifted her out of the chair, opened one eye and said, "Hello
Charlee." Then she closed the eye and let us drag her down to the billet. No one saw us on the way,
but her bunkmate, Laasonen, was sitting up reading.
        "She really drank the stuff, eh?" She regarded her friend with wry affection. "Here, let me
help."
        The three of us wrestled her into bed. Laasonen smoothed the hair out of her eyes. "She said it
was in the nature of an experiment."
        "More devotion to science than I have," Charlie said. "A stronger stomach, too."
        We all wished he hadn't said that.

         Diana sheepishly admitted that she hadn't remembered anything after the first drink, and
talking to her, I deduced that she thought Charlie had been there all along. Which was all for the best,
of course. But oh! Diana, my lovely latent heterosexual, let me buy you a bottle of good scotch the
next time we come into port. Seven hundred years from now.
         We got back into the tanks for the hop from Resh-10 to Kaph-35. That was two weeks at
twenty-five gees; then we had another four weeks of routine at one gravity.
         I had announced my open door policy, but practically no one ever took advantage of it. I saw
very little of the troops and those occasions were almost always negative: testing them on their
training review, handing out reprimands, and occasionally lecturing classes. And they rarely spoke
intelligibly, except in response to a direct question.
         Most of them either had English as their native tongue or as a second language, but it had
changed so drastically over 450 years that I could barely understand it, not at all if it was spoken
rapidly. Fortunately, they had all been taught early twenty-first century English during their basic
training; that language, or dialect, served as a temporal lingua franca through which a twenty-fifth
century soldier could communicate with someone who had been a contemporary of his nineteen-
times-great-grandparents. If there had still been such a thing as grandparents.
         I thought of my first combat commander, Captain Stott —whom I had hated just as cordially
as the rest of the company did— and tried to imagine how I would have felt if he had been a sexual
deviate and I'd been forced to learn a new language for his convenience.
         So we had discipline problems, sure. But the wonder was that we had any discipline at all.
Hilleboe was responsible for that; as little as I liked her personally, I had to to give her credit for
keeping the troops in line.
Most of the shipboard graffiti concerned improbable sexual geometries between the Second Field
Officer and her commander.

         From Kaph-35 we jumped to Samk-78, from there to Ayin-129 and finally to Sade-138. Most
of the jumps were no more than a few hundred light years, but the last one was 140,000 —
supposedly the longest collapsar jump ever made by a manned craft.
         The time spent scooting down the wormhole from one collapsar to the next was always the
same, independent of the distance. When I'd studied physics, they thought the duration of a collapsar
jump was exactly zero. But a couple of centuries later, they did a complicated waveguide experiment
that proved the jump actually lasted some small fraction of a nanosecond. Doesn't seem like much,
but they'd had to rebuild physics from the foundation up when the collapsar jump was first
discovered; they had to tear the whole damned thing down again when they found out it took tune to
get from A to B. Physicists were still arguing about it.
         But we had more pressing problems as we flashed out of Sade-138's collapsar field at three-
quarters of the speed of light. There was no way to tell immediately whether the Taurans had beat us
there. We launched a pre-programmed drone that would decelerate at 300 gees and take a preliminary
look around. It would warn us if it detected any other ships in the system, or evidence of Tauran
activity on any of the collapsar's planets.
         The drone launched, we zipped up in the tanks and the computers put us through a three-week
evasive maneuver while the ship slowed down. No problems except that three weeks is a hell of a
long time to stay frozen in the tank; for a couple of days afterward everybody crept around like aged
cripples.
If the drone had sent back word that the Taurans were already in the system, we would immediately
have stepped down to one gee and started-deploying fighters and drones armed with nova bombs. Or
we might not have lived that long: sometimes the Taurans could get to a ship only hours after it
entered the system. Dying in the tank might not be the most pleasant way to go.
         It took us a month to get back to within a couple of AUs of Sade-138, where the drone had
found a planet that met our requirements.
         It was an odd planet, slightly smaller than Earth but more dense. It wasn't quite the cryogenic
deepfreeze that most portal planets were, both because of heat from its core and because S Doradus,
the brightest star in the cloud, was only a third of a light year away.
         The strangest feature of the planet was its lack of geography. From space it looked like a
slightly damaged billiard ball. Our resident physicist, Lieutenant Gim, explained its relatively pristine
condition by pointing out that its anomalous, almost cometary orbit probably meant that it had spent
most of its lite as a "rogue planet," drifting alone through interstellar space. The chances were good
that it had never been struck by a large meteor until it wandered into Sade-138's bailiwick and was
captured—forced to share space with all the other flotsam the collapsar dragged around with it.
         We left the Masaryk II in orbit (it was capable of landing, but that would restrict its visibility
and getaway time) and shuttled building materials down to the surface with the six fighters.
         It was good to get out of the ship, even though the planet wasn't exactly hospitable. The
atmosphere was a thin cold wind of hydrogen and helium, it being too cold even at noon for any
other substance to exist as a gas.
         "Noon" was when S Doradus was overhead, a tiny, painfully bright spark. The temperature
slowly dropped at night, going from twenty-five degrees Kelvin down to seventeen degrees—which
caused problems, because just before dawn the hydrogen would start to condense out of the air,
making everything so slippery that it was useless to do anything other than sit down and wait it out.
At dawn a faint pastel rainbow provided the only relief from the black-and-white monotony of the
landscape.
         The ground was treacherous, covered with little granular chunks of frozen gas that shifted
slowly, incessantly in the anemic breeze. You had to walk in a slow waddle to stay on your feet; of
the four people who would die during the base's construction, three would be the victims of simple
falls.
        The troops weren't happy with my decision to construct the anti-spacecraft and perimeter
defenses before putting up living quarters. That was by the book, though, and they got two days of
shipboard rest for every "day" planetside—which wasn't overly generous, I admit, since ship days
were 24 hours long, and a day on the planet was 38.5 hours from dawn to dawn.
        The base was completed in just less than four weeks, and it was a formidable structure
indeed. The perimeter, a circle one kilometer in diameter, was guarded by twenty-five gigawatt lasers
that would automatically aim and fire within a thousandth of a second. They would react to the
motion of any significantly large object between the perimeter and the horizon. Sometimes when the
wind was right and the ground damp with hydrogen, the little ice granules would stick together into a
loose snowball and begin to roll. They wouldn't roll far.
        For early protection, before the enemy came over our horizon, the base was in the center of a
huge mine field. The buried mines would detonate upon sufficient distortion of their local
gravitational fields: a single Tauran would set one off if he came within twenty meters of it; a small
spacecraft a kilometer overhead would also detonate it. There were 2800 of them, mostly 100-
microton nuclear bombs. Fifty of them were devastatingly powerful tachyon devices. They were all
scattered at random in a ring that extended from the limit of the lasers' effectiveness, out another five
kilometers. Inside the base, we relied on individual lasers, microton grenades, and a tachyon-powered
repeating rocket launcher that had never been tried in combat, one per platoon. As a last resort, the
stasis field was set up beside the living quarters. Inside its opaque gray dome, as well as enough
paleolithic weaponry to hold off the Golden Horde, we'd stashed a small cruiser, just in case, we
managed to lose all our spacecraft in the process of winning a battle. Twelve people would be able to
get back to Stargate.
        It didn't do to dwell on the fact that the other survivors would have to sit on their hands until
relieved by reinforcements or death.
        The living quarters and administration facilities were all underground, to protect them from
line-of-sight weapons. It didn't do too much for morale, though; there were waiting lists for every
outside detail, no matter how strenuous or risky. I hadn't wanted the troops to go up to the surface in
their free time, both because of the danger involved and the administrative headache of constantly
checking equipment in and out and keeping track of who was where.
        Finally I had to relent and allow people to go up for a few hours every week. There was
nothing to see except the featureless plain and the sky (which was dominated by S Doradus during
the day, and the huge dim oval of the galaxy at night), but that was an improvement over staring at
the melted-rock walls and ceiling.
        A favorite sport was to walk out to the perimeter and throw snowballs in front of the laser;
see how small a snowball you could throw and still set the weapon off. It seemed to me that the
entertainment value of this pastime was about equal to watching a faucet drip, but there was no real
harm in it, since the weapons would only fire outward and we had power to spare.
        For five months things went pretty smoothly. Such administrative problems as we had were
similar to those we'd encountered on the Masaryk II. And we were ia less danger as passive
troglodytes than we had been scooting from collapsar to collapsar, at least until the enemy showed
up.
        I looked the other way when Rudkoski reassembled his still. Anything that broke the
monotony of garrison duty was welcome, and the chits not only provided booze for the troops but
gave them something to gamble with. I only interfered in two ways: nobody could go outside unless
they were totally sober, and nobody could sell sexual favors. Maybe that was the Puritan in me, but it
was, again, by the book. The opinion of the supporting specialists was split. Lieutenant Wilber, the
psychiatric officer, agreed with me; the sex counselors Kajdi and Valdez didn't. But then, they were
probably coining money, being the resident "professionals."
       Five months of comfortably boring routine, and then along came Private Graubard.

        For obvious reasons, no weapons were allowed in the living quarters. The way these people
were trained, even a fistfight could be a duel to the death, and tempers were short. A hundred merely
normal people would probably have been at each other's throats after a week in our caves, but these
soldiers had been hand-picked for their ability to get along in close confinement.
        Still, there were fights. Graubard had almost killed his ex-lover Schon when that worthy
made a face at him in the chow line. He had a week of solitary detention (so did Schon, for having
precipitated it) and then psychiatric counseling and punitive details. Then I transferred him to the
fourth platoon, so he wouldn't be seeing Schon every day.
        The first time they passed in the halls, Graubard greeted Schon with a savage kick to the
throat. Diana had to build him a new trachea. Graubard got a more intensive round of detention,
counseling and details — hell, I couldn't transfer him to another company— and then he was a good
boy for two weeks. I fiddled their work and chow schedules so the two would never be in the same
room together. But they met in a corridor again, and this time it came out more even: Schon got two
broken ribs, but Graubard got a ruptured testicle and lost four teeth.
        If it kept up, I was going to have at least one less mouth to feed.
        By the Universal Code of Military Justice I could have ordered Graubard executed, since we
were technically in a state of combat. Perhaps I should have, then and there. But Charlie suggested a
more humanitarian solution, and I accepted it.
        We didn't have enough room to keep Graubard in solitary detention forever, which seemed to
be the only humane yet practical thing to do, but they had plenty of room aboard the Masaryk II,
hovering overhead in a stationary orbit. I called Antopol and she agreed to take care of him. I gave
her permission to space the bastard if he gave her any trouble.
        We called a general assembly to explain things, so that the lesson of Graubard wouldn't be
lost on anybody. I was just starting to talk, standing on the rock dias with the company sitting in front
of me, and the officers and Graubard behind me— when the crazy fool decided to kill me.
        Like everybody else, Graubard was assigned five hours per week of training inside the stasis
field. Under close supervision, the soldiers would practice using their swords and spears and whatnot
on dummy Taurans. Somehow Graubard had managed to smuggle out a weapon, an Indian chakra,
which is a circle of metal with a razor-keen outer edge. It's a tricky weapon, but once you know how
to use it, it can be much more effective than a regular throwing knife. Graubard was an expert
        All in a fraction of a second, Graubard disabled the people on either side of him —hitting
Charlie in the temple with an elbow while he broke Hilleboe's kneecap with a kick— and slid the
chakra out of his tunic and spun it toward me in one smooth action. It had covered half the distance
to my throat before I reacted.
        Instinctively I slapped out to deflect it and came within a centimeter of losing four fingers.
The razor edge slashed open the top of my palm, but I succeeded in knocking the thing off course.
And Graubard was rushing me, teeth bared in an expression I hope I never see again.
        Maybe he didn't realize that the old queer was really only five years older than he; that the old
queer had combat reflexes and three weeks of negative feedback kinesthesia training. At any rate, it
was so easy I almost felt sorry for him.
        His right toe was turning in; I knew he would take one more step and go into a savage leap. I
adjusted the distance between us with a short ballestra and, just as both his feet left the ground, gave
him an ungentle side-kick to the solar plexus. He was unconscious before he hit the ground.
        If you had to kill a man, Kynock had said, I'm not sure you could do it. Over 120 people in
that small room, and the only sound was the steady drip of blood from my clenched fist to the floor.
Even though you must know a thousand different ways. If I had kicked him a few centimeters higher
and at a slightly different angle, it would have killed him instantly. But Kynock had been right; I
didn't have the instinct for it
        If I'd merely killed him in self-defense, my troubles would have been over instead of suddenly
being multiplied.
        A simple psychotic troublemaker a commander can lock up and forget about. But not a failed
assassin. And I didn't have to take a poll to know that executing him was not going to improve my
relationship with the troops.
        I realized that Diana was on her knees beside me, trying to pry open my fingers. "Check
Hilleboe and Moore," I mumbled, and to the troops: "Dismissed."

5
        "Don't be an ass," Charlie said. He was holding a damp rag to the bruise on the side of his
head.
         "You don't think I have to execute him?"
         "Stop twitching!" Diana was trying to get the lips of my wound to line up together so she
could paint them shut. From the wrist down, the hand felt like a lump of ice.
         "Not by your own hand, you don't You can detail someone. At random."
         "Charlie's right," Diana said. "Have everybody draw a slip of paper out of a bowl."
         I was glad Hilleboe was sound asleep on the other cot. I didn't need her opinion. "And if the
person so chosen refuses?"
         "Punish him and get another," Charlie said. "Didn't you learn anything in the can? You can't
abrogate your authority by publicly doing a job . . . that obviously should be detailed."
         "Any other job, sure. But for this . . . nobody in the company has ever killed. It would look
like I was getting somebody else to do my moral dirty work."
         "If it's so damned complicated," Diana said, "why not just get up in front of the troops and tell
them how complicated it is. Then have them draw straws. They aren't children.'*
         There had been an army in which that sort of thing was done, a strong quasi-memory told me.
The Marxist POUM militia in the Spanish Civil War, early twentieth, I You obeyed an order only
after it had been explained in \ detail; you could refuse if it didn't make sense. Officers and men got
drunk together and never saluted or used titles. They lost the war. But the other side didn't have any
fun.
         "Finished" Diana set the limp hand in my lap. "Don't try to use it for a half-hour. When it
starts to hurt, you can use it"
         I inspected the wound closely. "The lines don't match up. Not that I'm complaining."
         "You shouldn't By all rights, you ought to have just a stump. And no regeneration facilities
this side of Stargate."
         "Stump ought to be at the top of your neck," Charlie said. "I don't see why you have any
qualms. You should have killed the bastard outright."
         "I know that, goddamnit!" Both Charlie and Diana jumped at my outburst "Sorry, shit Look,
just let me do the worrying."
         "Why don't you both talk about something else for a while." Diana got up and checked the
contents of ha medical bag. "I've got another patient to check. Try to keep from exciting each other."
"Graubard?" Charlie asked. "That's right To make sure he can mount the scaffold without assistance."
"What if Hilleboe—"
         "She'll be out for another half-hour. I'll send Jarvil down, just in case." She hurried out the
door.
"The scaffold ..." I hadn't given that any thought "How the hell are we going to execute him? We
can't do it indoors: morale. Firing squad would be pretty grisly."
         "Chuck him out the airlock. You don't owe him any ceremony."
         "You're probably right I wasn't thinking about him." I wondered whether Charlie had ever
seen the body of a person who'd died that way. "Maybe we ought to just stuff him into the recycler.
He'd wind up there eventually."
         Charlie laughed. "That's the spirit"
         "We'd have to trim him up a little bit. Door's not very wide." Charlie had a few suggestions as
to how to get around that Jarvil came in and more-or-less ignored us.
         Suddenly the infirmary door banged open. A patient on a cart; Diana rushing alongside
pressing on the man's chest, while a private pushed. Two other privates were following, but hung
back at the door. "Over by the wall," she ordered.
         It was Graubard. "Tried to kill himself," Diana said, but that was pretty obvious. "Heart
stopped." He'd made a noose out of his belt; it was still hanging limply around his neck.
         There were two big electrodes with rubber handles hanging on the wall. Diana snatched them
with one hand while she ripped his tunic open with the other. "Get your hands off the cart!" She held
the electrodes apart, kicked a switch, and pressed them down onto his chest. They made a low hum
while his body trembled and flopped. Smell of burning flesh.
         Diana was shaking her head. "Get ready to crack him," she said to Jarvil. "Get Doris down
here." The body was gurgling, but it was a mechanical sound, like plumbing.
         She kicked off the power and let the electrodes drop, pulled a ring off her finger and crossed
to stick her arms in the sterilizer. Jarvil started to rub an evil-smelling fluid over the man's chest.
         There was a small red mark between the two electrode burns. It took me a moment to
recognize what it was. Jarvil wiped it away. I stepped closer and checked Graubard's neck.
         "Get out of the way, William, you aren't sterile." Diana felt his collarbone, measured down a
little ways and made an incision straight down to the bottom of his breastbone. Blood welled out and
Jarvil handed her an instrument that looked like big chrome-plated bolt-cutters. I looked away but
couldn't help hearing the thing crunch through his ribs. She asked for retractors and sponges and so
on while I wandered back to where I'd been sitting. With the corner of my eye I saw her working
away inside his thorax, massaging his heart directly. Charlie looked the way I felt. He called out
weakly, "Hey, don't knock yourself out, Diana." She didn't answer. Jarvil had wheeled up the
artificial heart and was holding out two tubes. Diana picked up a scalpel and I looked away again.

        He was still dead a half-hour later. They turned off the machine and threw a sheet over him.
Diana washed the blood off her arms and said, "Got to change. Back in a minute."
        I got up and walked to her billet, next door. Had to know. I raised my hand to knock but it
was suddenly hurting like there was a line of fire drawn across it. I rapped with my left and she
opened the door immediately.
        "What—oh, you want something for your hand." She was half-dressed, unself-conscious.
"Ask Jarvil." "No, that's not it. What happened, Diana?" "Oh. Well," she pulled a tunic over her head
and her voice was muffled. "It was my fault, I guess. I left him alone for a minute."
        "And he tried to hang himself."
        "That's right." She sat on the bed and offered me the chair. "I went off to the head and he was
dead by the time I got back. I'd already sent Jarvil away because I didn't want Hilleboe to be
unsupervised for too long."
        "But, Diana . . . there's no mark on his neck. No bruise, nothing."
        She shrugged. "The hanging didn't kill him. He had a heart attack."
        "Somebody gave him a shot. Right over his heart." She looked at me curiously. "I did that,
William. Adrenaline. Standard procedure."
        You get that red dot of expressed blood if you jerk away from the projector while you're
getting a shot Otherwise the medicine goes right through the pores, doesn't leave a mark. "He was
dead when you gave him the shot?"
        'That would be my professional opinion." Deadpan. "No heartbeat, pulse, respiration. Very
few other disorders show these symptoms."
        "Yeah. I see."
        "Is something . . . what's the matter, William?"
       Either I'd been improbably lucky or Diana was a very good actress. "Nothing. Yeah, I better
get something for this hand." I opened the door. "Saved me a lot of trouble."
       She looked straight into my eyes. 'That's true."

        Actually, I'd traded one kind of trouble for another. Despite the fact that there were several
disinterested witnesses to Graubard's demise, there was a persistent rumor that I'd had Doc Alsever
simply exterminate him —since I'd botched the job myself and didn't want to go through a
troublesome court-martial.
        The fact was that, under the Universal Code of Military "Justice," Graubard hadn't deserved
any kind of trial at all. All I had to do was say "You, you and you. Take this man out and kill him,
please." And woe betide the private who refused to carry out the order.
        My relationship with the troops did improve, in a sense. At least outwardly, they showed
more deference to me. But I suspected it was at least partly the cheap kind of respect you might offer
any ruffian who had proved himself to be dangerous and volatile.
        So Killer was my new name. Just when I'd gotten used to Old Queer.
        The base quickly settled back into its routine of training and waiting. I was almost impatient
for the Taurans to show up, just to get it over with one way or the other.
        The troops had adjusted to the situation much better than I had, for obvious reasons. They had
specific duties to perform and ample free time for the usual soldierly anodynes to boredom. My
duties were more varied but offered little satisfaction, since the problems mat percolated up to me
were of the "the buck stops here" type; those with pleasing, unambiguous solutions were taken care
of in the lower echelons.
        I'd never cared much for sports or games, but found myself turning to them more and more as
a kind of safety valve. For the first time in my life, in these tense, claustrophobic surroundings, I
couldn't escape into reading or study. So I fenced, quarterstaff and saber, with the other officers,
worked myself to exhaustion on the exercise machines and even kept a jump-rope in my office. Most
of the other officers played chess, but they could usually beat me —whenever I won it gave me the
feeling I was being humored. Word games were difficult because my language was an archaic dialect
that they had trouble manipulating. And I lacked the time and talent to master "modern" English.
        For a while I let Diana feed me mood-altering drugs, but the cumulative effect of them was
frightening —I was getting addicted in a way that was at first too subtle to bother me— so I stopped
short. Then I tried some systematic psychoanalysis with Lieutenant Wilber. It was impossible.
Although he knew all about my problems in an academic kind of way, we didn't speak the same
cultural language; his counseling me about love and sex was like me telling a fourteenth-century serf
how best to get along with his priest and landlord.
        And that, after all, was the root of my problem. I was sure I could have handled the pressures
and frustrations of command; of being cooped up in a cave with these people who at times seemed
scarcely less alien than the enemy; even the near-certainty that it could lead only to painful death in a
worthless cause —if only I could have had Marygay with me. And the feeling got more intense as the
months crept by.
        He got very stern with me at this point and accused me of romanticizing my position. He
knew what love was, he said; he had been in love himself. And the sexual polarity of the couple
made no difference —all right, I could accept that; that idea had been a cliche in my parents'
generation (though it had run into some predictable resistance in my own). But love, he said, love
was a fragile blossom; love was a delicate crystal; love was an unstable reaction with a half-life of
about eight months. Bullshit, I said, and accused him of wearing cultural blinders; thirty centuries of
prewar society taught that love was one thing that could last to the grave and even beyond and if he
had been born instead of hatched he would know that without being told! Whereupon he would
assume a wry, tolerant expression and reiterate that I was merely a victim of self-imposed sexual
frustration and romantic delusion.
        In retrospect, I guess we had a good time arguing with each other. Cure me, he didn't.
        I did have a new friend who sat in my lap all the time. It was the cat, who had the usual talent
for hiding from people who like cats and cleaving unto those who have sinus trouble or just don't like
sneaky little animals. We did have something in common, though, since to my knowledge he was the
only other heterosexual male mammal within any reasonable distance. He'd deen castrated, of course,
but that didn't make much difference under the circumstances.

6
        It was exactly 400 days since the day we had begun construction. I was sitting at my desk not
checking out BBlleboe's new duty roster. The cat was on my lap, purring loudly even though I
refused to pet it Charlie was stretched out in a chair reading something on the viewer. The phone
buzzed and it was the Commodore.
        "They're here."
        "What?"
        "I said they're here. A Tauran ship just exited the collapsar field. Velocity .80c. Deceleration
thirty gees. Give or take."
        Charlie was leaning over my desk. "What?" I dumped the cat
        "How long? Before you can pursue?" I asked.
        "Soon as you get off the phone." I switched off and went over to the logistic computer, which
was a twin to the one on Masaryk II and had a direct data link to it While I tried to get numbers out
of the thing, Charlie fiddled with the visual display.
        The display was a hologram about a meter square by half a meter thick and was programmed
to show the positions of Sade-138, our planet, and a few other chunks of rock in the system. There
were green and red dots to show the positions of our vessels and the Taurans'.
        The computer said that the minimum time it could take the Taurans to decelerate and get back
to this planet would be a little over eleven days. Of course, that would be straight maximum
acceleration and deceleration all the way; we could pick them off like flies on a wall. So, like us,
they'd mix up their direction of flight and degree of acceleration in a random way. Based on several
hundred past records of enemy behavior, the computer was able to give us a probability table:

       Days to Contact               Probability
              11              .000001
              15              .001514
              20              .032164
              25              .103287
              30              .676324
              35              .820584
              40              .982685
              45              .993576
              50              .999369

                      MEDIAN
               28.9554                .500000


       Unless, of course, Antopol and her gang of merry pirates managed to make a kill. The
chances of that, I had learned in the can, were slightly less than fifty-fifty.
       But whether it took 28.9554 days or two weeks, those of us on the ground had to just sit on
our hands and watch. If Antopol was successful, then we wouldn't have to fight until the regular
garrison troops replaced us here and we moved on to the next collapsar.
         "Haven't left yet." Charlie had the display cranked down to minimum scale; the planet was a
white ball the size of a large melon and Masaryk II was a green dot off to the right some eight melons
away; you couldn't get both on the screen at the same time.
         While we were watching a small green dot popped out of the ship's dot and drifted away from
it. A ghostly number 2 drifted beside it, and a key projected on the display's lower left-hand corner
identified it as 2 —Pursuit Drone. Other numbers in the key identified the Masaryk II, a planetary
defense fighter and fourteen planetary defense drones. Those sixteen ships were not yet far enough
away from one another to have separate dots.
         The cat was rubbing against my ankle; I picked it up and stroked it. "Tell Hilleboe to call a
general assembly. Might as well break it to everyone at once."
         The men and women didn't take it very well, and I couldn't blame them. We had all expected
the Taurans to attack much sooner —and when they persisted in not coming, the feeling grew that
Strike Force Command had made a mistake and that they'd never show up at all.
         I wanted the company to start weapons training in earnest; they hadn't used any high-powered
weapons in almost two years. So I activated their laser-fingers and passed out the grenade and rocket
launchers. We couldn't practice inside the base for fear of damaging the external sensors and
defensive laser ring. So we turned off half the circle of bevawatt lasers and went out about a klick
beyond the perimeter, one platoon at a time, accompanied by either me or Charlie. Rusk kept a close
watch on the early-warning screens. If anything approached, she would send up a flare, and the
platoon would have to get back inside the ring before the unknown came over the horizon, at which
time the defensive lasers would come on automatically. Besides knocking out the unknown, they
would fry the platoon in less than .02 second.
         We couldn't spare anything from the base to use as a target, but that turned out to be no
problem. The first tachyon rocket we fired scooped out a hole twenty meters long by ten wide by five
deep; the rubble gave us a multitude of targets from twice-man-sized on down.
         The soldiers were good, a lot better than they had been with the primitive weapons in the
stasis field. The best laser practice turned out to be rather like skeet-shooting: pair up the people and
have one stand behind the other, throwing rocks at random intervals. The one :who was shooting had
to gauge the rock's trajectory and zap it before it bit the ground. Their eye-hand coordination was
impressive (maybe the Eugenics Council had done something right). Shooting at rocks down to
pebble-size, most of them could do better than nine out of ten. Old non-bioengineered me could hit
maybe seven out of ten, and I'd had a good deal more practice than they had.
         They were equally facile at estimating trajectories with the grenade launcher, which was a
more versatile weapon than it had been in the past. Instead of shooting one-microton bombs with a
standard propulsive charge, it had four different charges and a choice of one-, two-, three- or four-
microton bombs. And for really close infighting, where it was dangerous to use the lasers, the barrel
of the launcher would unsnap, and you could load it with a magazine of "shotgun" rounds. Each shot
would send out an expanding cloud of a thousand tiny flechettes mat were instant death out to five
meters and turned to harmless vapor at six.
         The tachyon rocket launcher required no skill whatsoever. All you had to do was to be careful
no one was standing behind you when you fired it; the backwash from the rocket was dangerous for
several meters behind the launching tube. Otherwise, you just lined your target up in the crosshairs
and pushed the button. You didn't have to worry about trajectory; the rocket traveled in a straight line
for all practical purposes. It reached escape velocity in less than a second.
         It improved the troops' morale to get out and chew up the landscape with their new toys. But
the landscape wasn't fighting back. No matter how physically impressive the weapons were, their
effectiveness would depend on what the Taurans could throw back. A Greek phalanx must have
looked pretty impressive, but it wouldn't do too well against a single man with a flamethrower.
         And as with any engagement, because of time dilation, there was no way to tell what sort of
weaponry they would have. They might have never heard of the stasis field. Or they might be able to
say a magic word and make us disappear.
        I was out with the fourth platoon, burning rocks, when Charlie called and asked me to come
back in, urgent. I left Heimoff in charge.
        "Another one?" The scale of the holograph display was such that our planet was pea-sized,
about five centimeters from the X that marked the position of Sade-138. There were forty-one red
and green dots scattered around the field; the key identified number 41 as Tauran Cruiser (2).
        "You called Antopol?"
        "Yeah." He anticipated the next question. "It'll take almost a day for the signal to get there and
back."
        "It's never happened before," but of course Charlie knew that.
        "Maybe this collapsar is especially important to them."
        "Likely." So it was almost certain we'd be fighting on the ground. Even if Antopol managed
to get the first cruiser^ she wouldn't have a fifty-fifty chance on the second one. Low on drones and
fighters. "I wouldn't like to be Antopol now."
        "She'll just get it earlier."
        "I don't know. We're in pretty good shape."
        "Save it for the troops, William." He turned down the display's scale to where it showed only
two objects: Sade-138 and the new red dot, slowly moving.

        We spent the next two weeks watching dots blink out And if you knew when and where to
look, you could go outside and see the real thing happening, a hard bright speck of white light that
faded in about a second.
        In that second, a nova bomb had put out over a million times the power of a gigawatt laser. It
made a miniature star half a click in diameter and as hot as the ulterior of the sun. Anything it
touched it would consume. The radiation from a near miss could botch up a ship's electronics beyond
repair —two fighters, one of ours and one of theirs, had evidently suffered that fate, silently drifting
out of the system at a constant velocity, without power.
        We had used more powerful nova bombs earlier in the war, but the degenerate matter used to
fuel them was unstable in large quantities. The bombs had a tendency to explode while they were still
inside the ship. Evidently the Taurans had the same problem —or they had copied the process from
us in the first place— because they had also scaled down to nova bombs that used less than a hundred
kilograms of degenerate matter. And they deployed them much the same way we did, the warhead
separating into dozens of pieces as it approached the target, only one of which was the nova bomb.
        They would probably have a few bombs left over after they finished off Masdryk II and her
retinue of fighters and drones. So it was likely that we were wasting time and energy in weapons
practice.
        The thought did slip by my conscience that I could gather up eleven people and board the
fighter we had hidden safe behind the- stasis field. It was pre-programmed to take us back to
Stargate.
        I even went to the extreme of making a mental list of the eleven, trying to think of eleven
people who meant more to me than the rest Turned out I'd be picking six at random.
        I put the thought away, though. We did have a chance, maybe a damned good one, even
against a fully-armed cruiser. It wouldn't be easy to get a nova bomb close enough to include us
inside its kill-radius.
        Besides, they'd space me for desertion. So why bother?

        Spirits rose when one of Antopol's drones knocked out the first Tauran cruiser. Not counting
the ships left behind for planetary defense, she still had eighteen drones and two fighters. They
wheeled around to intercept the second cruiser, by then a few light-hours away, still being harassed
by fifteen enemy drones.
         One of the drones got her. Her ancillary crafts continued the attack, but it was a rout. One
fighter and three drones fled the battle at maximum acceleration, looping up over the plane of the
ecliptic, and were not pursued. We watched them with morbid interest while the enemy cruiser
inched back to do battle with us. The fighter was headed back for Sade-138, to escape. Nobody
blamed them. In fact, we sent them a farewell-good luck message; they didn't respond, naturally,
being zipped up in the tanks. But it would be recorded.
         It took the enemy five days to get back to the planet and be comfortably ensconced in a
stationary orbit on the other side. We settled in for the inevitable first phase of the attack, which
would be aerial and totally automated: their drones against our lasers. I put a force of fifty men and
women inside the stasis field, in case one of the drones got through. An empty gesture, really; the
enemy could just stand by and wait for them to turn off the field, fry them the second it flickered out.
         Charlie had a weird idea that I almost went for. "We could boobytrap the place." "What do
you mean?" I said. "This place is booby-trapped, out to twenty-five klicks."
         "No, not the mines and such. I mean the base itself, here, underground." "Go on."
         "There are two nova bombs in that fighter." He pointed at the stasis field through a couple of
hundred meters of rock. "We can roll them down here, booby-trap them, then hide everybody in the
stasis field and wait."
         In a way it was tempting. It would relieve me from any responsibility for decision-making,
leave everything up to chance. "I don't think it would work, Charlie."
         He seemed hurt. "Sure it would."
         "No, look. For it to work, you have to get every single Tauran inside the kill-radius before it
goes off —but they wouldn't all come charging in here once they breached our defenses. Least of all
if the place seemed deserted. They'd suspect something, send in an advance party. And after the
advance party set off the bombs—" "We'd be back where we started, yeah. Minus the base. Sorry."
         I shrugged. "It was an idea. Keep thinking, Charlie." I turned my attention back to the display,
where the lopsided space war was in progress. Logically enough, the enemy wanted to knock out that
one fighter overhead before he started to work on us. About all we could do was watch the red dots
crawl around the planet and try to score. So far the pilot had managed to knock out all the drones; the
enemy hadn't sent any fighters after him yet.
         I'd given the pilot control over five of the lasers in our defensive ring. They couldn't do much
good, though. A gigawatt laser pumps out a billion kilowatts per second at a range of a hundred
meters. A thousand klicks up, though, the beam was attenuated to ten kilowatts. Might do some
damage if it hit an optical sensor. At least confuse things.
         "We could use another fighter. Or six."
         "Use up the drones," I said. We did have a fighter, of course, and a swabbie attached to us
who could pilot it. It might turn out to be out only hope, if they got us cornered in the stasis field.
         "How far away is the other guy?" Charlie asked, meaning the fighter pilot who had turned tail.
I cranked down the scale, and the green dot appeared at the right of the display. "About six light-
hours." He had two drones left, too near to him to show as separate dots, having expended one in
covering his getaway. "He's not accelerating any more, but he's doing point nine gee."
         "Couldn't do us any good if he wanted to." Need almost a month to slow down.
         At that low point, the light that stood for our own defensive fighter faded out. "Shit."
         "Now the fun starts. Should I tell the troops to get ready, stand by to go topside?"
         "No . . . have them suit up, in case we lose air. But I expect it'll be a little while before we
have a ground attack." I turned the scale up again. Four red dots were already creeping around the
globe toward us.

       I got suited up and came back to Administration to watch the fireworks on the monitors.
       The lasers worked perfectly. All four drones converged on us simultaneously; were targeted
and destroyed. All but one of the nova bombs went off below our horizon (the visual horizon was
about ten kilometers away, but the lasers were mounted high and could target something at twice that
distance). The bomb that detonated on our horizon had melted out a semicircular chunk that glowed
brilliantly white for several minutes. An hour later, it was still glowing dull orange, and the ground
temperature outside had risen to fifty degrees Absolute, melting most of our snow, exposing an
irregular dark gray surface.
        The next attack was also over in a fraction of a second, but this tune there had been eight
drones, and four of them got within ten-Hicks. Radiation from the glowing craters raised the
temperature to nearly 300 degrees. That was above the melting point of water, and I was starting to
get worried. The fighting suits were good to over a thousand degrees, but the automatic lasers
depended on low-temperature superconductors for their speed.
        I asked the computer what the lasers' temperature limit was, and it printed out TR 398-734-
009-265, "Some Aspects Concerning the Adaptability of Cryogenic Ordnance to use in Relatively
High-Temperature Environments," which had lots of handy advice about how we could insulate the
weapons if we had access to a fully-equipped armorer's shop. It did note that the response time of
automatic-aiming devices increased as the temperature increased, and that above some "critical
temperature," the weapons would not aim at all. But there was no way to predict any individual
weapon's behavior, other than to note that the highest critical temperature recorded was 790 degrees
and the lowest was 420 degrees.
        Charlie was watching the display. His voice was flat over the suit's radio. "Sixteen this time."
        "Surprised?" One of the few things we knew about Tauran psychology was a certain
compulsiveness about numbers, especially primes and powers of two.
        "Let's just hope they don't have 32 left." I queried the computer on this; all it could say was
that the cruiser had thus far launched a total of 44 drones and that some cruisers had been known to
carry as many as 128.
        We had more than a half-hour before the drones would strike. I could evacuate everybody to
the stasis field, and they would be temporarily safe if one of the nova bombs got through. Safe, but
trapped. How long would it take the crater to cool down, if three or four —let alone sixteen— of the
bombs made it through? You couldn't live forever in a fighting suit, even though it recycled
everything with remorseless efficiency. One week was enough to make you thoroughly miserable.
Two weeks, suicidal. Nobody had ever gone three weeks, under field conditions.
        Besides, as a defensive position, the stasis field could be a death-trap. The enemy has all the
options since the dome is opaque; the only way you can find out what they're up to is to stick your
head out. They didn't have to wade in with primitive weapons unless they were impatient They could
keep the dome saturated with laser fire and wait for you to turn off the generator. Meanwhile
harassing you by throwing spears, rocks, arrows into the dome —you could return fire, but it was
pretty futile.
        Of course, if one man stayed inside the base, the others could wait out the next half-hour in
the stasis field. If he didn't come get them, they'd know the outside was hot. I chinned the
combination that would give me a frequency available to everybody echelon 5 and above.
        "This is Major Mandella." That still sounded like a bad joke.
        I outlined the situation to them and asked them to tell their troops that everyone in the
company was free to move into the stasis field. I would stay behind and come retrieve them if things
went well—not out of nobility, of course; I preferred taking the chance of being vaporized in a
nanosecond, rather than almost certain slow death under the gray dome.
        I chinned Charlie's frequency. "You can go, too. Ill take care of things here."
        "No, thanks," he said slowly. "I'd just as soon . . . Hey, look at this."
        The cruiser had launched another red dot, a couple of minutes behind the others. The display's
key identified it as being another drone. "That's curious."
        "Superstitious bastards," he said without feeling. - It turned out that only eleven people
chose to join the fifty who had been ordered into the dome. That shouldn't have surprised me,
but it did.
         As the drones approached, Charlie and I stared at the monitors, carefully not looking at the
holograph display, tacitly agreeing that it would be better not to know when they were one minute
away, thirty seconds . . . And then, like the other times, it was over before we knew it had started.
The screens glared white and there was a yowl of static, and we were still alive.
         But this time there were fifteen new holes on the horizon —or closer!— and the temperature
was rising so fast that the last digit in the readout was an amorphous blur. The number peaked in the
high 800s and began to slide back down.
         We had never seen any of the drones, not during that tiny fraction of a second it took the
lasers to aim and fire. But then the seventeenth one flashed over the horizon, zig-zagging crazily, and
stopped directly overhead. For an instant it seemed to hover, and then it began to fall. Half the lasers
had detected it, and they were firing steadily, but none of them could aim; they were all stuck in their
last firing position.
         It glittered as it dropped, the mirror polish of its sleek hull reflecting the white glow from the
craters and the eerie nickering of the constant, impotent laser fire. I heard Charlie take one deep
breath, and the drone fell so close you could see spidery Tauran numerals etched on the hull and a
transparent porthole near the tip —then its engine flared and it was suddenly gone.
         "What the hell?" Charlie said, quietly.
         The porthole. "Maybe reconnaissance."
         "I guess. So we can't touch them, and they know it."
         "Unless the lasers recover." Didn't seem likely. "We better get everybody under the dome. Us,
too."
         He said a word whose vowel had changed over the centuries, but whose meaning was clear.
"No hurry. Let's see what they do."
         We waited for several hours. The temperature outside stabilized at 690 degrees —just under
the melting point of zinc, I remembered to no purpose— and I tried the manual controls for the
lasers, but they were still frozen.
         "Here they come," Charlie said. "Eight again."
         I started for the display. "Guess we'll—"
         "Wait! They aren't drones." The key identified all eight with the legend Troop Carrier.
         "Guess they want to take the base," he said. "Intact"
         That, and maybe try out new weapons and techniques. "It's not much of a risk for them. They
can always retreat and drop a nova bomb in our laps."
         I called Brill and had her go get everybody who was in the stasis field, set them up with the
remainder of her platoon as a defensive line circling around the northeast and northwest quardrants.
I'd put the rest of the people on the other half-circle.
         "I wonder," Charlie said. "Maybe we shouldn't put everyone topside at once. Until we know
how many Taurans there are."
         That was a point. Keep a reserve, let the enemy underestimate our strength. "It's an idea. . . .
There might be just 64 of them in eight carriers." Or 128 or 256. I wished our spy satellites had a
finer sense of discrimination. But you can only cram so much into a machine the size of a grape.
         I decided to let Brill's seventy people be our first line of defense and ordered them into a ring
in the ditches we had made outside the base's perimeter. Everybody else would stay downstairs until
needed.
         If it turned out that the Taurans, either through numbers or new technology, could field an
unstoppable force, I'd order everyone into the stasis field. There was a tunnel from the living quarters
to the dome, so the people underground could go straight there in safety. The ones in the ditches
would have to fall back under fire. If any of them were still alive when I gave the order.
         I called in Hilleboe and had her and Charlie keep watch over the lasers. If they came unstuck,
I'd call Brill and her people back. Turn on the automatic aiming system again, then sit back and
watch the show. But even stuck, tke lasers could be useful. Charlie marked the monitors to show
where the rays would go: he and Hilleboe could fire them manually whenever something moved into
a weapon's line-of-sight.
         We had about twenty minutes. Brill was walking around the perimeter with her men and
women, ordering them into the ditches a squad at a time, setting up overlapping fields of fire. I broke
in and asked her to set up the heavy weapons so that they could be used to channel the enemy's
advance into the path of the lasers. There wasn't much else to do but wait. I asked Charlie to measure
the enemy's progress and try to give us an accurate count-down, then sat at my desk and pulled out a
pad, to diagram Brill's arrangement and see whether I could improve on it.
         The cat jumped up on my lap, mewling piteously. He'd evidently been unable to tell one
person from the other, suited up. But nobody else ever sat at this desk. I reached up to pet him and he
jumped away.
         The first line that I drew ripped through four sheets of paper. It had been some time since I'd
done any delicate work in a suit. I remembered how in training, they'd made us practice controlling
the strength-amplification circuits by passing eggs from person to person, messy business. I
wondered if they still had eggs on Earth.
         The diagram completed, I couldn't see any way to add to it. All those reams of theory
crammed in my brain; there was plenty of tactical advice about envelopment and encirclement, but
from the wrong point of view. If you were the one who was being encircled, you didn't have many
options. Sit tight and fight. Respond quickly to enemy concentrations of force, but stay flexible so the
enemy can't employ a diversionary force to divert strength from some predictable section of your
perimeter. Make full use of air and space support, always good advice. Keep your head down and
your chin up and pray for the cavalry. Hold your position and don't contemplate Dienbienphu, the
Alamo, the Battle of Hastings.
         "Eight more carriers out," Charlie said. "Five minutes. Until the first eight get here."
         So they were going to attack in two waves. At least two. What would I do, in the Tauran
commander's position? That wasn't too far-fetched; the Taurans lacked imagination in tactics and
tended to copy human patterns.
         The first wave could be a throwaway, a kamikaze attack to soften us up and evaluate our
defenses. Then the second would come in more methodically, and finish the job. Or vice versa: the
first group would have twenty minutes to get entrenched; then the second could skip over their heads
and hit us hard at one spot —breach the perimeter and over-run the base.
         Or maybe they sent out two forces simply because two was a magic number. Or they could
launch only eight troop carriers at a tune (that would be bad, implying that the carriers were large; in
different situations they had used carriers holding as few as 4 troops or as many as 128).
         "Three minutes." I stared at the cluster of monitors that showed various sectors of the mine
field. If we were lucky, they'd land out there, out of caution. Or maybe pass over it low enough to
detonate mines.
         I was feeling vaguely guilty. I was safe in my hole, doodling, ready to start calling out ofders.
How did those seventy sacrificial lambs feel about their absentee commander?
         Then I remembered how I had felt about Captain Stott that first mission, when he'd elected to
stay safely in orbit while we fought on the ground. The rush of remembered hate was so strong I had
to bite back nausea.
         "Hilleboe, can you handle the lasers by yourself?"
         "I don't see why not, sir."
         I tossed down the pen and stood up. "Charlie , you take over the unit coordination; you can do
it as well as I could. I'm going topside."
         "I wouldn't advise that, sir."
         "Hell no, William. Don't be an idiot."
         "I'm not taking orders, I'm giv—"
        "You wouldn't last ten seconds up there," Charlie said.
        "I'll take the same chance as everybody else."
        "Don't you hear what I'm saying. They'll kill you!"
        "The troops? Nonsense. I know they don't like me especially, but—"
        "You haven't listened in on the squad frequencies?" No, they didn't speak my brand of
English when they talked among themselves.
        "They think you put them out on the line for punishment, for cowardice. After you'd told them
anyone was free to go into the dome."
        "Didn't you, sir?" Hilleboe said.
        "To punish them? No, of course not." Not consciously. "They were just up there when I
needed . . . Hasn't Lieutenant Brill said anything to them?"
        "Not that I've heard," Charlie said. "Maybe she's been too busy to tune in."
        Or she agreed with them. "I'd better get—"
        "There!" Hilleboe shouted. The first enemy ship was visible in one of the mine field monitors;
the others appeared in the next second. They came in from random directions and weren't evenly
distributed around the base. Five in the northeast quadrant and only one in the southwest. I relayed
the information to Brill.
        But we had predicted their logic pretty well; all of them were coming down in the ring of
mines. One came close enough to one of the tachyon devices to set it off. The blast caught the rear
end of the oddly streamlined craft, causing it to make a complete flip and crash nose-first. Side ports
opened up and Taurans came crawling out. Twelve of them; probably four left inside. If all the others
had sixteen as well, there were only slightly more of them than of us.
        In the first wave.
        The other seven had landed without incident, and yes, there were sixteen each. Brill shuffled a
couple of squads to conform to the enemy's troop concentration, and he waited.
        They moved fast across the mine field, striding in unison like bowlegged, top-heavy robots,
not even breaking stride when one of them was blown to bits by a mine, which happened eleven
times.
        When they came over the horizon, the reason for their apparently random distribution was
obvious: they had analyzed beforehand which approaches would give them the most natural cover,
from the rubble that the drones had kicked up. They would be able to get within a couple of
kilometers of the base before we got any clear line-of-sight of them. And their suits had augmentation
circuits similar to ours, so they could cover a kilometer in less than a minute.
        Brill had her troops open fire immediately, probably more for morale than out of any hope of
actually hitting the enemy. They probably were getting a few, though it was hard to tell. At least the
tachyon rockets did an impressive job of turning boulders into graveL
        The Taurans returned fire with some weapon similar to the tachyon rocket, maybe exactly the
same. They rarely found a mark, though; our people were at and below ground level, and if the rocket
didn't hit something, it would keep going on forever, amen. They did score a hit on one of the
bevawatt lasers, though, and the concussion that filtered down to us was strong enough to make me
wish we had burrowed a little deeper than twenty meters.
        The gigawatts weren't doing us any good. The Tau-rans must have figured out the lines of
sight ahead of time, and gave them wide berth. That turned out to be fortunate, because it caused
Charlie to let his attention wander from the laser monitors for a moment.
        "What the hell?"
        "What's that, Charlie?" I didn't take my eyes off the monitors. Waiting for something to
happen.
        "The ship, the cruiser—it's gone." I looked at the holograph display. He was right; the only
red lights were those that stood for the troop carriers.
        "Where did it go?" I asked inanely.
         "Let's play it back." He programmed the display to go back a couple of minutes and cranked
out the scale to where both planet and collapsar showed on the cube. The cruiser showed up, and
with it, three green dots. Our "coward," attacking the cruiser with only two drones.
         But he had a little help from the laws of physics.
         Instead of going into collapsar insertion, he had skimmed around the collapsar field in a
slingshot orbit. He had come out going nine-tenths of the speed of light; the drones were going .99c,
headed straight for the enemy cruiser. Our planet was about a thousand light-seconds from the
collapsar, so the Tauran ship had only ten seconds to detect and stop both drones. And at that speed,
it didn't matter whether you'd been hit by a nova-bomb or a spitball.
         The first drone disintegrated the cruiser, and the other one, .01 second behind, glided on down
to impact on the planet. The fighter missed the planet by a couple of hundred kilometers and hurtled
on into space, decelerating with the maximum twenty-five gees. He'd be back in a couple of months.
         But the Taurans weren't going to wait. They were getting close enough to our lines for both
sides to start using lasers, but they were also within easy grenade range. A good-size rock could
shield them from laser fire, but the grenades and rockets were slaughtering them.
         At first, Brill's troops had the overwhelming advantage; fighting from ditches, they could only
be harmed by an occasional lucky shot or an extremely well-aimed grenade (which the Taurans threw
by hand, with range of several hundred meters). Brill had lost four, but it looked as if the Tauran
force was down to less than half its original size.
         Eventually, the landscape had been torn up enough so that the bulk of the Tauran force was
able to fight from holes in the ground. The fighting slowed down to individual laser duels,
punctuated occasionally by heavier weapons. But it wasn't smart to use up a tachyon rocket against a
single Tauran, not with another force of unknown size only a few minutes away.
         Something had been bothering me about that holographic replay. Now, with the battle's lull, I
knew what it was.
         When that second drone crashed at near-lightspeed, how much damage had it done to the
planet? I stepped over to the computer and punched it up; found out how much energy had been
released in the collision, and then compared it with geological information in the computer's
memory.
         Twenty times as much energy as the most powerful earthquake ever recorded. On a planet
three-quarters the size of Earth.
         On the general frequency: "Everybody—topside! Right now!" I palmed the button that would
cycle and open the airlock and tunnel that led from Administration to the surface.
         "What the hell, Will—"
         "Earthquake!" How long? "Move!"
         Hilleboe and Charlie were right behind me. The cat was sitting on my desk, licking himself
unconcernedly. I had an irrational impulse to put him inside my suit, which was the way he'd been
carried from the ship to the base, but knew he wouldn't tolerate more than a few minutes of it. Then I
had the more reasonable impulse to simply vaporize him with my laser-finger, but by then the door
was closed and we were swarming up the ladder. All the way up, and for some time afterward, I was
haunted by the image of that helpless animal, trapped under tons of rubble, dying slowly as the air
hissed away.
         "Safer in the ditches?" Charlie said.
         "I don't know," I said. "Never been in an earthquake." Maybe the walls of the ditch would
close up and crush us.
         I was surprised at how dark it was on the surface. S Doradus had almost set; the monitors had
compensated for the low light level.
         An enemy laser raked across the clearing to our left, making a quick shower of sparks when it
flicked by a gi-gawatt mounting. We hadn't been seen yet. We all decided yes, it would be safer in the
ditches, and made it to the nearest one in three strides.
        There were four men and women in the ditch, one of them badly wounded or dead. We
scrambled down the ledge and I turned up my image amplifier to log two, to inspect our ditchmates.
We were lucky; one was a grenadier and they also had a rocket launcher. I could just make out the
names on their helmets. We were in Brill's ditch, but she hadn't noticed us yet. She was at the
opposite end, cautiously peering over the edge, directing two squads in a flanking movement. When
they were safely in position, she ducked back down.             "Is that you, Major?"
        "That's right," I said cautiously. I wondered whether any of the people in the ditch were
among the ones after my scalp.
        "What's this about an earthquake?" She had been told about the cruiser being destroyed, but
not about the other drone. I explained in as few words as possible.
        "Nobody's come out of the airlock," she said. "Not yet. I guess they all went into the stasis
field."
        "Yeah, they were just as close to one as the other." Maybe some of them were still down
below, hadn't taken my warning seriously. I churned the general frequency to check, and then all hell
broke loose.
        The ground dropped away and then flexed back up; slammed us so hard that we were
airborne, tumbling out of the ditch. We flew several meters, going high enough to see the pattern of
bright orange and yellow ovals, the craters where nova bombs had been stopped. I landed on my feet
but the ground was shifting and slithering so much that it was impossible to stay upright.
        With a basso grinding I could feel through my suit, the cleared area above our base crumbled
and fell in. Part of the stasis field's underside was exposed when the ground subsided; it settled to its
new level with aloof grace.
        Well, minus one cat. I hoped everybody else had time and sense enough to get under the
dome.
        A figure came staggering out of the ditch nearest to me and I realized with a start that it
wasn't human. At that range, my laser burned a hole straight through his helmet; he took two steps
and fell over backward. Another helmet peered over the edge of the ditch. I sheared the top of ft off
before he could raise his weapon.
        I couldn't get my bearings. The only thing that hadn't changed was the stasis dome, and it
looked the same from any angle. The gigawatt lasers were all buried but one of them had switched
on, a brilliant flickering searchlight that illuminated a swirling cloud of vaporized rock.
        Obviously, though, I was in enemy territory. I started across the trembling ground toward the
dome.
I couldn't raise any platoon leaders. All of them but Brill were probably inside the dome. I did get
Hilleboe and Charlie; told Hilleboe to go inside the dome and roust everybody out. If the next wave
also had 128, we were going to need everybody.
        The tremors died down and I found my way into a "friendly" ditch—the cooks' ditch, in fact,
since the only people there were Orban and Rudkoski.
        "Looks like you'll have to start from scratch again, Private."                      *
        "That's all right, sir. Liver needed a rest."
        I got a beep from Hilleboe and chinned her on. "Sir . . .there were only ten people, there. The
rest didn't make it."
        "They stayed behind?" Seemed like they'd had plenty of time.
        "I don't know, sir."
        "Never mind. Get me a count, how many people we have, all totalled." I tried the platoon
leaders' frequency again and it was still silent
        The three of us watched for enemy laser fire for a couple of minutes, but there was none.
Probably waiting for reinforcements.
        Hilleboe called back. "I only get fifty-three, sir. Some may be unconscious."
        "All right. Have them sit tight until—" Then the second wave showed up, the troop carriers
roaring over the horizon with their jets pointed our way, decelerating. "Get some rockets on those
bastards!" Hilleboe yelled to everyone in particular. But nobody had managed to stay attached to a
rocket launcher while he was being tossed around. No grenade launchers, either, and the range was
too far for the hand lasers to do any damage.          These carriers were four or five times the size of
the ones in the first wave. One of them grounded about a kilometer in front of us, barely stopping
long enough to disgorge its troops. Of which there were over 50, probably 64 —times 8 made 512.
No way we could hold them back.
         "Everybody listen, this is Major Mandella." I tried to keep my voice even and quiet. "We're
going to retreat back into the dome, quickly but in an orderly way. I know we're scattered all over
hell. If you belong to the second or fourth platoon, stay put for a minute and give covering fire while
the first and third platoons, and support, fall back.
         "First and third and support, fall back to about half your present distance from the dome, then
take cover and defend the second and fourth as they come back. They'll go to the edge of the dome
and cover you while you come back the rest of the way." I shouldn't have said "retreat"; that word
wasn't in the book. Retrograde action.
         There was a lot more retrograde than action. Eight or nine people were firing, and all the rest
were in full flight. Rudkoski and Orban had vanished. I took a few carefully aimed shots, to no great
effect, then ran down to the other end of the ditch, climbed out and headed for the dome.
         The Taurans started firing rockets, but most of them seemed to be going too high. I saw two
of us get blown away before I got to my half-way point; found a nice big rock and hid behind it. I
peeked out and decided that only two or three of the Taurans were close enough to be even remotely
possible laser targets, and the better part of valor would be in not drawing unnecessary attention to
myself. I ran the rest of the way to the edge of the field and stopped to return fire. After a couple of
shots, I realized that I was just making myself a target; as far as I could see there was only one other
person who was still running toward the dome.
         A rocket zipped by, so close I could have touched it I flexed my knees and kicked, and
entered the dome in a rather undignified posture.

7
         Inside, I could see the rocket that had missed me drifting lazily through the gloom, rising
slightiy as it passed through to the other side of the dome,. It would vaporize the instant it came out
the other side, since all of the kinetic energy it had lost in abruptly slowing down to 16.3 meters per
second would come back in the form of heat.
         Nine people were lying dead, face-down just inside of the field's edge. It wasn't unexpected,
though it wasn't the sort of thing you were supposed to tell the troops.
         Their fighting suits were intact—otherwise they wouldn't have made it this far—but
sometime during the past few minutes' rough-and-tumble, they had damaged the coating of special
insulation that protected them from the stasis field. So as soon as they entered the field, all electrical
activity in their bodies ceased, which killed them instantly. Also, since no molecule in their bodies
could move faster than 16.3 meters per second, they instantly froze solid, then: body temperature
stabilized at a cool 0.426 degrees Absolute.
         I decided not to turn any of them over to find out their names, not yet. We had to get some
sort of defensive position worked out before the Taurans came through the dome. If they decided to
slug it out rather than wait.
         With elaborate gestures, I managed to get everybody collected in the center of the field, under
the fighter's tail, where the weapons were racked.
         There were plenty of weapons, since we had been prepared to outfit three times this number
of people. After giving each person a shield and short-sword, I traced a question in the snow: GOOD
ARCHERS? RAISE HANDS. I got five volunteers, then picked out three more so that all the bows
would be in use. Twenty arrows per bow. They were the most effective long-range weapons we had;
the arrows were almost invisible in their slow flight, heavily weighted and tipped with a deadly sliver
of diamond-hard crystal.
         I arranged the archers in a circle around the fighter (its landing fins would give them partial
protection from missiles coming in from behind) and between each pah* of archers put four other
people: two spear-throwers, one quarterstaff, and a person armed with battleax and a dozen throwing
knives. This arrangement would theoretically take care of the enemy at any range, from the edge of
the field to hand-to-hand combat.
         Actually, at some 600-to-42 odds, they could probably walk in with a rock in each hand, no
shields or special weapons,- and still beat the shit out of us.
         Assuming they knew what the stasis field was. Their technology seemed up to date in all
other respects.
         For several hours nothing happened. We got about as bored as anyone could, waiting to die.
No one to talk to, nothing to see but the unchanging gray dome, gray snow, gray spaceship and a few
identically gray soldiers. Nothing to hear, taste or smell but yourself.
         Those of us who still had any interest in the battle were keeping watch on the bottom edge of
the dome, waiting for the first Taurans to come through. So it took us a second to realize what was
going on when the attack did start. It came from above, a cloud of catapulted darts swarming in
through the dome some thirty meters above the ground, headed straight for the center of the
hemisphere.
         The shields were big enough that you could hide most of your body behind them by crouching
slightly; the people who saw the darts coming could protect themselves easily. The ones who had
their backs to the action, or were just asleep at the switch, had to rely on dumb luck for survival;
there was no way to shout a warning, and it took only three seconds for a missile to get from the edge
of the dome to its center.
         We were lucky, losing only five. One of them was an archer, Shubik. I took over her bow and
we waited, expecting a ground attack immediately.
         It didn't come. After a half-hour, I went around the circle and explained with gestures that the
first thing you were supposed to do, if anything happened, was to touch the person on your right.
He'd do the same, and so on down the line.
         That might have saved my life. The second dart attack, a couple of hours later, came from
behind me. I felt the nudge, slapped the person on my right, turned around and saw the cloud
descending. I got the shield over my head, and they hit a split-second later.
         I set down my bow to pluck three darts from the shield and the ground attack started.
         It was a weird, impressive sight. Some three hundred of them stepped into the field
simultaneously, almost shoulder-to-shoulder around the perimeter of the dome. They advanced in
step, each one holding a round shield barely large enough to hide his massive chest. They were
throwing darts similar to the ones we had been barraged with.
         I set up the shield in front of me —it had little extensions on the bottom to keep it upright—
and with the first arrow I shot, I knew we had a chance. It struck one of them in the center of his
shield, went straight through and penetrated his suit.
         It was a one-sided massacre. The darts weren't very effective without the element of surprise
—but when one came sailing over my head from behind, it did give me a crawly feeling between the
shoulder blades.
With twenty arrows I got twenty Taurans. They closed ranks every time one dropped; you didn't even
have to aim. After running out of arrows, I tried throwing their darts back at them. But their light
shields were quite adequate against the small missiles.
         We'd killed more than hah' of them with arrows and spears, long before they got into range of
the hand-to-hand weapons. I drew my sword and waited. They still outnumbered us by better than
three to one.
When they got within ten meters, the people with the chakram throwing knives had their own field
day. Although the spinning disc was easy enough to see and took more than a half-second to get from
thrower to target, most of the Taurans reacted in the same ineffective way, raising up the shield to
ward it off. The razor-sharp, tempered heavy blade cut through the light shield like a buzz-saw
through cardboard.
         The first hand-to-hand contact was with the quarter-staffs, which were metal rods two meters
long that tapered at the ends to a double-edged, serrated knife blade. The Taurans had a cold-blooded
—or valiant, if your mind works that way—method for dealing with them. They would simply grab
the blade and die. While the human was trying to extricate his weapon from the frozen death-grip, a
Tauran swordsman, with a scimitar over a meter long, would step in and kill him.
         Besides the swords, they had a bolo-like thing that was a length of elastic cord that ended
with about ten centimeters of something like barbed wire, and a small weight to propel it. It was a
dangerous weapon for all concerned; if they missed their target it would come snapping back
unpredictably. But they hit their target pretty -often, going under the shields and wrapping the thorny
wire around ankles.
         I stood back-to-back with Private Erikson, and with our swords we managed to stay alive for
the next few minutes. When the Taurans were down to a couple of dozen survivors, they just turned
around and started marching out. We threw some darts after them, getting three, but we didn't want to
chase after them. They might turn around and start hacking again.
         There were only twenty-eight of us left standing. Nearly ten times that number of dead
Taurans Uttered the ground, but there was no satisfaction in it.
         They could do the whole thing over, with a fresh 300. And this time it would work.
         We moved from body to body, pulling out arrows and spears, then took up places around the
fighter again. Nobody bothered to retrieve the quarterstaffs. I counted noses: Charlie and Diana were
still alive (Hilleboe had been one of the quarterstaff victims), as well as two supporting officers.
Wilber and Szydlowska. Rudkoski was still alive but Orban had taken a dart.
         After a day of waiting, it looked as though the enemy had decided on a war of attrition rather
than repeating the ground attack. Darts came in constantly, not in swarms anymore, but in twos and
threes and tens. And from all different angles. We couldn't stay alert forever; they'd get somebody
every three or four hours.
         We took turns sleeping, two at a time, on top of the stasis field generator. Sitting directly
under the bulk of the fighter, it was the safest place in the dome.
         Every now and then, a Tauran would appear at the edge of the field, evidently to see whether
any of us were left. Sometimes we'd shoot an arrow at him, for practice.
         The darts stopped falling after a couple of days. I supposed it was possible that they'd simply
run out of them. Or maybe they'd decided to stop when we were down to twenty survivors.
         There was a more likely possibility. I took one of the quarterstaffs down to the edge of the
field and poked it through, a centimeter or so. When I drew it back, the point was melted off. When I
showed it to Charlie, he rocked back and forth (the only way you can nod in a suit); this sort of thing
had happened before, one of the first times the stasis field hadn't worked. They simply " saturated it
with laser fire and waited for us to go stir-crazy and turn off the generator. They were probably sitting
in their ships playing the Tauran equivalent of pinochle.
         I tried to think. It was hard to keep your mind on something-for any length of time in that
hostile environment, sense-deprived, looking over your shoulder every few seconds. Something
Charlie had said. Only yesterday. I couldn't track it down. It wouldn't have worked then; that was all I
could remember. Then finally it came to me.
         I called everyone over and wrote in the snow:

       GET NOVA BOMBS FROM SHIP.
       CARRY TO EDGE OF FIELD.
       MOVE FIELD.
         Szydlowska knew where the proper tools would be aboard ship. Luckily, we had left all of the
entrances open before turning on the stasis field; they were electronic and would have been frozen
shut. We got an assortment of wrenches from the engine room and climbed up to the cockpit. He
knew how to remove the access plate that exposed a crawl space into the bomb-bay. I followed him
in through the meter-wide tube.
         Normally, I supposed, it would have been pitch-black. But the stasis field illuminated the
bomb-bay with the same dim, shadowless light that prevailed outside. The bomb-bay was too small
for both of us, so I stayed at the end of the crawl space and watched.
         The bomb-bay doors had a "manual override" so they were easy; Szydlowska just turned a
hand-crank and we were in business. Freeing the two nova bombs from their cradles was another
thing. Finally, he went back down to the engine room and brought back a crowbar. He pried one
loose and I got the other, and we rolled them out the bomb-bay.
         Sergeant Anghelov was already working on them by the time we climbed back down. All you
had to do to arm the bomb was to unscrew the fuse on the nose of it and poke something around in
the fuse socket to wreck the delay mechanism and safety restraints.
         We carried them quickly to the edge, six people per bomb, and set them down next to. each
other. Then we waved to the four people who were standing by at the field generator's handles. They
picked it up and walked ten paces in the opposite direction. The bombs disappeared as the edge of the
field slid over them.
         There was no doubt that the bombs went off. For a couple of seconds it was hot as the interior
of a star outside, and even the stasis field took notice of the fact: about a third of the dome glowed a
dull pink for a moment, then was gray again. There was a slight acceleration, like you would feel in a
slow elevator. That meant we were drifting down to the bottom of the crater. Would there be a solid
bottom? Or would we sink down through molten rock to be trapped like a fly in amber —didn't pay
to even think about that. Perhaps if it happened, we could blast our way out with the fighter's giga-
watt laser.
         Twelve of us, anyhow.
         HOW LONG? Charlie scraped in the snow at my feet.
         That was a damned good question. About all I knew was the amount of energy two nova
bombs released. I didn't know how big a fireball they would make, which would determine the
temperature at detonation and the size of the crater. I didn't know the heat capacity of the surrounding
rock, or its boiling point. I wrote: ONE WEEK, SHRUG? HAVE TO THINK.
         The ship's computer could have told me in a thousandth of a second, but it wasn't talking. I
started writing equations in the snow, trying to get a maximum and minimum figure for the length of
time it would take for the outside to cool down to 500 degrees. Anghelov, whose physics was much
more up-to-date, did his own calculations on the other side of the ship.
         My answer said anywhere from six hours to six days (although for six hours, the surrounding
rock would have to conduct heat like pure copper), and Anghelov got five hours to 4-1/2 days. I
voted for six and nobody else got a vote.
         We slept a lot. Charlie and Diana played chess by scraping symbols in the snow; I was never
able to hold the shifting positions of the pieces in my mind. I Checked my figures several times and
kept coming up with six days. I checked Anghelov's computations, too, and they seemed all right, but
I stuck to my guns. It wouldn't hurt us to stay in the suits an extra day and a half. We argued good-
naturedly in terse shorthand.
         There had been nineteen of us left the day we tossed the bombs outside. There were still
nineteen, six days later, when I paused with my hand over the generator's cutoff switch. What was
waiting for us out there? Surely we had killed all the Taurans within several klicks of the explosion.
But there might have been a reserve force farther away, now waiting patiently on the crater's lip. At
least you could push a quarterstaff through the field and have it come back whole.
       I dispersed the people evenly around the area, so they might not get us with a single shot.
Then, ready to turn it back on immediately if anything went wrong, I pushed.

8
         My radio was still tuned to the general frequency; after more than a week of silence my ears
were suddenly assaulted with loud, happy babbling.
         We stood in the center of a crater almost a kilometer wide and deep. Its sides were a shiny
black crust shot through with red cracks, hot but no longer dangerous. The hemisphere of earth that
we rested on had sunk a good forty meters into the floor of the crater, while it had still been molten,
so now we stood on a kind of pedestal. Not a Tauran in sight.
         We rushed to the ship, sealed it and filled it with cool air and popped our suits. I didn't press
seniority for the one shower; just sat back in an acceleration couch and took deep breaths of air that
didn't smell like recycled Mandella.
         The ship was designed for a maximum crew of twelve, so we stayed outside in shifts of seven
to keep from straining the life support systems. I sent a repeating message to the other fighter, which
was still over six weeks away, that we were in good shape and waiting to be picked up. I was
reasonably certain he would have seven free berths, since the normal crew for a combat mission was
only three.
         It was good to walk around and talk again. I officially suspended all things military for the
duration of our stay on the planet. Some of the people were survivors of Brill's mutinous bunch, but
they didn't show any hostility toward me.
         We played a kind of nostalgia game, comparing the various eras we'd experienced on Earth,
wondering what it would be like in the 700-years-future we were going back to. Nobody mentioned
the fact that we would at best go back to a few months' furlough and then be assigned to another
strike force, another turn of the wheel. Wheels. One day Charlie asked me from what country my
name originated; it sounded weird to him. I told him it originated from the lack of a dictionary and
that if it were spelled right, it would look even weirder.
         I got to kill a good half-hour explaining all the peripheral details to that. Basically, though,
my parents were "hippies" (a kind of subculture in the late-twentieth-century America, that rejected
materialism and embraced a broad spectrum of odd ideas) who lived with a group of other hippies in
a small agricultural community. When my mother got pregnant, they wouldn't be so conventional as
to get married: this entailed the woman taking the man's name, and implied that she was his property.
But they got all intoxicated and sentimental and decided they would both change their names to be
the same. They rode into the nearest town, arguing all the way as to what name would be the best
symbol for the love-bond between them — I narrowly missed having a much shorter name — and
they settled on Mandala.
         A mandala is a wheel-like design the hippies had borrowed from a foreign religion, that
symbolized the cosmos, the cosmic mind, God, or whatever needed a symbol. Neither my mother nor
my father knew how to spell the word, and the magistrate in town wrote it down the way it sounded
to him.
         They named me William in honor of a wealthy uncle, who unfortunately died penniless.
         The six weeks passed rather pleasantly: talking, read-big, resting. The other ship landed next
to ours and did have nine free berths. We shuffled crews so that each ship had someone who could
get it out of trouble if the pre-programmed jump sequence malfunctioned. I assigned myself to the
other ship, in hopes it would have some new books. It didn't.
         We zipped up in the tanks and took off simultaneously

        We wound up spending a lot of time in the tanks, just to keep from looking at the same faces
all day long in the crowded ship. The added periods of acceleration got us back to Stargate in ten
months, subjective. Of course, it was 340 years (minus seven months) to the hypothetical objective
observer.
        There were hundreds of cruisers in orbit around Stargate. Bad news: with that kind of backlog
we probably wouldn't get any furlough at all.
        I supposed I was more likely to get a court-martial than a furlough, anyhow. Losing 88
percent of my company, many of them because they didn't have enough confidence in me to obey the
direct earthquake order. And we were back where we'd started on Sade-138; no Taurans there, but no
base either.
        We got landing instructions and went straight down, no shuttle. There was another surprise
waiting at the spaceport. Dozens of cruisers were standing around on the ground (they'd never done
that before for fear that Stargate would be hit) —and two captured Tauran cruisers as well. We'd
never managed to get one intact.
Seven centuries could have brought us a decisive advantage, of course. Maybe we were winning.
        We went through an airlock under a "returnees" sign. After the air cycled and we'd popped
our suits, a beautiful young woman came in with a cartload of tunics and told us, in perfectly-
accented English, to get dressed and go to the lecture hall at the end of the corridor to our left.
        The tunic felt odd, light yet warm. It was the first thing I'd worn besides a fighting suit or bare
skin in almost a year.
        The lecture hall was about a hundred times too big for the twenty-two of us. The same woman
was there and asked us to move down to the front. That was unsettling; I could have sworn she had
gone down the corridor the other way —I knew she had; I'd been captivated by the sight of her
clothed behind.
        Hell, maybe they had matter transmitters. Or telepor-tation. Wanted to save herself a few
steps.
We sat for a minute and a man, clothed in the same kind of unadorned tunic the woman and we were
wearing, walked across the stage with a stack of thick notebooks under each arm.
        The woman followed him on, also carrying notebooks.
        I looked behind me and she was still standing in the aisle. To make things even more odd, the
man was virtually a twin to both of them.
        The man riffled through one of the notebooks and cleared his throat. "These books are for
your convenience," he said, also with perfect accent, "and you don't have to read them if you don't
want to. You don't have to do anything you don't want to do, because . . . you're free men and women.
The war is over."
        Disbelieving silence.
        "As you will read in this book, the war ended 221 years ago. Accordingly, this is the year 220.
Old style, of course, it is 3138 A.D.
        "You are the last group of soldiers to return. When you leave here, I will leave as well. And
destroy Star-gate. It exists only as a rendezvous point for returnees and as a monument to human
stupidity. And shame. As you will read. Destroying it will be a cleansing."
        He stopped speaking and the woman started without a pause. "I am sorry for what you've been
through and wish I could say that it was for good cause, but as you will read, it was not.
        "Even the wealth you have accumulated, back salary and compound interest, is worthless, as I
no longer use money or credit. Nor is there such a thing as an economy, in which to use these . . .
things."
        "As you must have guessed by now," the man took -over, "I am, we are, clones of a single
individual. Some two hundred and fifty years ago, my name was Kahn. Now it is Man.
        "I had a direct ancestor in your company, a Corporal Larry Kahn. It saddens me that he didn't
come back." "I am over ten billion individuals but only one consciousness," she said. "After you read,
I will try to clarify this. I know that it will be difficult to understand. "No other humans are
quickened, since I am the perfect pattern. Individuals who die are replaced.
        "There are some planets, however, on which humans are born in the normal, mammalian way.
If my society is too alien for you, you may go to one of these planets. If you wish to take part in
procreation, I will not discourage it. Many veterans ask me to change then- polarity to heterosexual
so that they can more easily fit into these other societies. This I can do very easily."
         Don't worry about that, Man, just make out my ticket.
         "You will be my guest here at Stargate for ten days, after which you will be taken wherever
you want to go," he said. "Please read this book in the meantime. Feel free to ask any questions, or
request any service." They both stood and walked off the stage.
         Charlie was sitting next to me. "Incredible," he said. "They let ... they encourage . . . men and
women to do that again? Together?"
         The female aisle-Man was sitting behind us, and she answered before I could frame a
reasonably sympathetic, hypocritical reply. "It isn't a judgment on your society," she said, probably
not seeing that he took it a little more personally than that. "I only feel that it's necessary as a eugenic
safety device. I have no evidence that there is anything wrong with cloning only one ideal individual,
but if it turns out to have been a mistake, there will be a large genetic pool with which to start again."
         She patted him on the shoulder. "Of course, you don't have to go to these breeder planets.
You can stay on one of my planets. I make no distinction between heterosexual play and
homosexual."
         She went up on the stage to give a long spiel about where we were going to stay and eat and
so forth while we were on Stargate. "Never been seduced by a computer before," Charlie muttered.

        The 1143-year-long war had been begun on false pretenses and only continued because the
two races were unable to communicate.
        Once they could talk, the first question was "Why did you start this thing?" and the answer
was "Me?"
        The Taurans hadn't known war for millenia, and toward the beginning of the twenty-first
century it looked as though mankind was ready to outgrow the institution as well. But the old soldiers
were still around, and many of them were in positions of power. They virtually ran the United
Nations Exploratory and Colonization Group, that was taking advantage of the newly-discovered
collapsar jump to explore interstellar space.
Many of the early ships met with accidents and disappeared. The ex-military men were suspicious.
They armed the colonizing vessels, and the first time they met a Tauran ship, they blasted it.
        They dusted off their medals and the rest was going to be history.
        You couldn't blame it all on the military, though. The evidence they presented for the
Taurans' having been responsible for the earlier casualties was laughably thin. The few people who
pointed this out were ignored.
        The fact was, Earth's economy needed a war, and this one was ideal. It gave a nice hole to
throw buckets of money into, but would unify humanity rather than dividing it.
        The Taurans relearned war, after a fashion. They never got really good at it, and would
eventually have lost.
        The Taurans, the book explained, couldn't communicate with humans because they had no
concept of the individual; they had been natural clones for millions of years. Eventually, Earth's
cruisers were manned by Man, Kahn-clones, and they were for the first time able to get through to
each other.
        The book stated this as a bald fact. I asked a Man to explain what it meant, what was special
about clone-to-clone communication, and he said that I a priori couldn't understand it. There were no
words for it, and my brain wouldn't be able to accommodate the concepts even if there were words.
        All right. It sounded a little fishy, but I was willing to accept it. I'd accept that up was down if
it meant the war was over.

       Man was a pretty considerate entity. Just for us twenty-two, he went to the trouble of
rejuvenating a little restaurant-tavern and staffing it at all hours (I never saw a Man eat or drink —
guess they'd discovered a way around it). I was sitting in there one evening, drinking beer and reading
their book, when Charlie came in and sat down next to me.
        Without preamble, he said, "I'm going to give it a try."
        "Give what a try?"
        "Women. Hetero." He shuddered. "No offense . . . it's not really very appealing." He patted
my hand, looking distracted. "But the alternative . . . have you tried it?"
        "Well ... no, I haven't." Female Man was a visual treat, but only in the same sense as a
painting or a piece of sculpture. I just couldn't see them as human beings.
        "Don't." He didn't elaborate. "Besides, they say —he says, she says, it says— that they can
change me back just as easily. If I don't like it."
        "You'll like it, Charlie."
        "Sure that's what they say." He ordered a stiff drink. "Just seems unnatural. Anyway, since,
uh, I'm going to make the switch, do you mind if ... why don't we plan on going to the same planet?"
        "Sure, Charlie, that'd be great." I meant it. "You know where you're going?"
        "Hell, I don't care. Just away from here."
        "I wonder if Heaven's still as nice—"
        "No." Charlie jerked a thumb at the bartender. "He lives there."
        "I don't know. I guess there's a list."
        A man came into the tavern, pushing a cart piled high with folders. "Maior Mandella?
Captain Moore?"
        "That's us," Charlie said.
        "These are your military records. I hope you find them of interest. They were transferred to
paper when your strike force was the only one outstanding, because it would have been impractical to
keep the normal data retrieval networks running to preserve so few data."
        They always anticipated your questions, even when you didn't have any.
        My folder was easily five times as thick as Charlie's. Probably thicker than any other, since I
seemed to be the only trooper who'd made it through the whole duration. Poor Marygay. "Wonder
what kind of report old Stott filed about me." I flipped to the front of the folder.
        Stapled to the front page was a small square of paper. All the other pages were pristine white,
but this one was tan with age and crumbling around the edges.
        The handwriting was familiar, too familiar even after so long. The date was over 250 years
old.
        I winced and was blinded by sudden tears. I'd had no reason to suspect that she might be
alive. But I hadn't really known she was dead, not until I saw that date.
        "William? What's—"
        "Leave me be, Charlie. Just for a minute." I wiped my eyes and closed the folder. I shouldn't
even read the damned note. Going to a new life, I should leave the old ghosts behind.
        But even a message from the grave was contact of a sort. I opened the folder again.

11 Oct2878
William-
         All this is in your personnel file. But knowing you, you might just chuck it. So I made sure
you'd get this note.
         Obviously, I lived. Maybe you will, too. Join me.
         I know from the records that you're out at Sade-138 and won't be back for a couple of
centuries. No problem.
         I'm going to a planet they call Middle Finger, the fifth planet out from Mizar. It's two
collapsar jumps, ten months subjective. Middle Finger is a kind of Coventry for heterosexuals. They
call it a "eugenic control baseline."
         No matter. It took all of my money, and all the money of five other old-timers, but we bought
a cruiser from UNEF. And we're using it as a time machine.
         So I'm on a relativistic shuttle, waiting for you. All it does is go out five light years and come
back to Middle Finger, very fast. Every ten years I age about a month. So if you're on schedule and
still alive, Til only be twenty-eight when you get here. Hurry!
         I never found anybody else and I don't want anybody else. I don't care whether you're ninety
years old or thirty. If I can't be your lover, I'll be your nurse.
                                                   —Marygay.


      "Say, bartender."
      "Yes, Major?"
      "Do you know of a place called Middle Finger? Is it still there?"
      "Of course it is. Where would it be?" Reasonable question. "A very nice place. Garden planet.
Some people don't think it's exciting enough."
      "What's this all about?" Charlie said. I handed the bartender my empty glass. "I just found out
where we're going."

9 EPILOGUE
      From The New Voice, Paxton, Middle Finger 24-6

14/2/3143 OLD-TIMER HAS FIRST BOY
        Marygay Potter-Mandella (24 Post Road, Paxton) gave birth Friday last to a fine baby boy,
3.1 kilos.
        Marygay lays claim to being the second-"oldest" resident of Middle Finger, having been born
in 1977. She fought through most of the Forever War and then waited for her mate on the time
shuttle, 261 years.
        The baby, not yet named, was delivered at home with the help of a friend of the family, Dr.
Diana Alsever-Moore.
