                                     The Forever War
                                          Joe Haldeman

<Notes from the scanner: >
<The numbers in bold are chapter numbers, not page numbers.>
<Version 1.0 scanned & corrected, may still be missing some punctuation & formatting.>
<I have two editions of this book, the 1976 Ballantine edition and the 1999 edition. Where the text
differs I have stuck to the 1976 version. Most noticable in part 2, chapter 7+ >

<Back cover blurb>

"...ONE OF THE MOST MEMORABLE CHARACTERS SF HAS EVER PRODUCED ..A
CERTAIN CANDIDATE FOR TOP SF AWARDS!" — Chicago Daily News
       WHAT A HITCH!
        Private William Mandella hadn't wanted to go to war. But being one of Earth's best and
brightest, he —along with the rest of his prime and promiscuous co-ed cadre— had been drafted into
the interstellar conflict.
        Battling the Taurans was the least of his problems as he worked his way up through the ranks
to major. In spanning the stars at faster-than-light speeds, he aged only months...while Earth aged
centuries.
        And though war in space was hell, Major Mandella soon learned it was nothing compared to
coping with 1,200 drastically changing years back home!

 "A VASTLY ENTERTAINING TRIP!" — The New York Times.

<Inner sleeve blurb>

After a thousand years Major Mandella had learned to cope

  He could cope with the savagery of the alien Taurans . . .
  He could cope with the deep-sleep learning process that forced the whole of Earth's military
  history into his brain . . .
  He could cope with having his leg blown off and the wait for regeneration . . .
  He could cope with a regiment of lesbians and homosexuals who considered him a pervert . . .
  But when they sent the woman he loved into the future, Major Mandella really began to wonder
  what he was fighting for!

  "THIS WAR IS THE OPPOSITE OF THE ONE HEINLEIN GLORIFIED IN STAR-SHIP
  TROOPERS — BLOODY, CRUEL AND MEANINGLESS. A SPLENDID THOUGHTFUL
  ADVENTURE !"
                           —Kirkus


<And now . . . The book itself>
Private Mandella

1
         "Tonight we're going to show you eight silent ways to kill a man." The guy who said that was
a sergeant who didn't look five years older than me. So if he'd ever killed a man in combat, silently or
otherwise, he'd done it as an infant.
         I already knew eighty ways to kill people, but most of them were pretty noisy. I sat up straight
in my chair and assumed a look of polite attention and fell asleep with my eyes open. So did most
everybody else. We'd learned that they never scheduled anything important for these after-chop
classes.
         The projector woke me up and T sat through a short tape showing the "eight silent ways."
Some of the actors must have been brainwipes, since they were actually killed.
         After the tape a girl in the front row raised her hand. The sergeant nodded at her and she rose
to parade rest Not bad looking, but kind of chunky about the neck and shoulders. Everybody gets that
way after carrying a heavy pack around for a couple of months.
         "Sir" -we had to call sergeants "sir" until graduation- "most of those methods, really, they
looked . . . kind of silly."
         "For instance?"
         "Like killing a man with a blow to the kidneys, from an entrenching tool. I mean, when would
you actually have only an entrenching tool, and no gun or knife? And why not just bash him over the
head with it?"
         "He might have a helmet on," he said reasonably.
         "Besides, Taurans. probably don't even have kidneys!"
         He shrugged. "Probably they don't." This was 1997, and nobody had ever seen a Tauran;
hadn't even found any pieces of Taurans bigger than a scorched chromosome.
         "But their body chemistry is similar to ours, and we have to assume they're similarly complex
creatures. They must have weaknesses, vulnerable spots. You have to find out where they are.
         "That's the important thing." He stabbed a finger at the screen. "Those eight convicts got
caulked for your benefit because you've got to find out how to kill Tau-rans, and be able to do it
whether you have a megawatt laser or an emery board."
         She sat back down, not looking too convinced.
         "Any more questions?" Nobody raised a hand.
         "OK. Tench-hut!" We staggered upright and he looked at us expectantly.
         "Fuck you, sir," came the familiar tired chorus.
         "Louder!"
         "FUCK YOU, SIR!" One of the army's less-inspired morale devices.
         "That's better. Don't forget, pre-dawn maneuvers tomorrow. Chop at 0330, first formation,
0400. Anybody sacked after 0340 owes one stripe. Dismissed."
         I zipped up my coverall and went across the snow to the lounge for a cup of soya and a joint.
I'd always been able to get by on five or six hours of sleep, and this was the only time I could be by
myself, out of the army for a while. Locked at the newsfax for a few minutes. Another ship got
caulked, out by Aldebaran sector. That was four years ago. They were mounting a reprisal fleet, but
it'll take four years more for them to get out there. By then, the Taurans would have every portal
planet sewed up tight
         Back at the billet, everybody else was sacked and the main lights were out. The whole
company'd been dragging ever since we got back from the two-week lunar training. I dumped my
clothes in the locker, checked the roster and found out I was in bunk 31. Goddammit, right under the
heater,
         I slipped through the curtain as quietly as possible so as not to wake up the person next to me.
Couldn't see who it was, but I couldn't have cared, less. I slipped under the blanket.
        "You're late, Mandella," a voice yawned. It was Rogers.
        "Sorry I woke you up," I whispered.
        "Sallright." She snuggled over and clasped spoon-fashion. She was warm and reasonably
soft.
        I patted her hip in what I hoped was a brotherly fashion. "Night, Rogers."
        "G'night, Stallion." She returned the gesture more pointedly.
        Why do you always get the tired ones when you're ready and the randy ones when you're
tired? I bowed to the inevitable.

2
        "Awright, let's get some goddamn back inta that! Stringer team! Move it up—move your ass
up!"
        A warm front had come in about midnight and the snow had turned to sleet. The permaplast
stringer weighed five hundred pounds and was a. bitch to handle, even when it wasn't covered with
ice. There were four of us, two at each end, carrying the plastic girder with frozen fingertips. Rogers
was my partner.
        "Steel!" the guy behind me yelled, meaning that he was losing his hold. It wasn't steel, but it
was heavy enough to break your foot. Everybody let go and hopped away. It splashed slush and mud
all over as.
        "Goddamnit, Petrov," Rogers said, "why didn't you go out for the Red Cross or something?
This fucken thing's not that fucken heavy." Most of the girls were a little more circumspect in then-
speech. Rogers was a little butch.
        "Awright, - get a fucken move on, stringers—epoxy team! Dog 'em! Dog 'em!"
        Our two epoxy people ran up, swinging their buckets. "Let's go, Mandella. I'm freezin' my
balls off."
        "Me, too," the girl said with more feeling than logic.
        "One-two-heave!" We got the thing up again and staggered toward the bridge. It was about
three-quarters completed. Looked as if the second platoon was going to beat us. I wouldn't give a
damn, but the platoon that got their bridge built first got to fly home. Four miles of muck for the rest
of us, and no rest before chop.
        We got the stringer in place, dropped it with a clank, and fitted the static clamps that held it to
the rise-beams. The female half of the epoxy team started slopping glue on it before we even had it
secured. Her partner was waiting for the stringer on the other side. The floor team was waiting at the
foot of the bridge, each one holding a piece of the light, stressed permaplast over his head like an
umbrella. They were dry and clean, I wondered aloud what they had done to deserve it, and Rogers
suggested a couple of colorful, but unlikely, possibilities. We were going back to stand by the next
stringer when the field first (name of Dougelstein, but we called him "Awright") blew a whistle and
bellowed, "Awright, soldier boys and girls, ten minutes. Smoke 'em if you got 'em." He reached into
his pocket and turned on the control that heated our coveralls.
        Rogers and I sat down on our end of the stringer and I took out my weed box. I had lots of
joints, but we were ordered not to smoke them until after night-chop. The only tobacco I had was a
cigarro butt about three inches long. I lit it on the side of the box; it wasn't too bad after the first
couple of puffs. Rogers took a puff, just to be sociable, but made a face and gave it back. "Were you
in school when you got drafted?" she asked.
        "Yeah. Just got a degree in physics. Was going after a teacher's certificate."
        She nodded soberly. "I was in biology . . ."
        "Figures." I ducked a handful of slush. "How far?"
        "Six years, bachelor's and technical." She slid her boot along the ground, turning up a ridge of
mud and slush the consistency of freezing ice milk. "Why the fuck did this have to happen?"
        I shrugged. It didn't call for an answer, least of all the answer that the UNEF kept giving us.
Intellectual and physical elite of the planet, going out to guard humanity against the Tauran menace.
Soyashit. It was all just a big experiment. See whether we could goad the Taurans into ground action.
         Awright blew the whistle two minutes early, as expected, but Rogers and I and the other two
stringers got to sit for a minute while the epoxy and floor teams finished covering our stringer. It got
cold fast, sitting there with out suits turned off, but we remained inactive on principle.
         There really wasn't any sense in having us train in the cold. Typical army half-logic. Sure, it
was going to be cold where we were going, but not ice-cold or snow-cold. Almost by definition, a
portal planet remained within a degree or two of absolute zero all the time— since collapsars don't
shine— and the first chill you felt would mean that you were a dead man.
         Twelve years before, when I was ten years old, they had discovered the collapsar jump. Just
fling an object at a collapsar with sufficient speed, and out it pops in some other part of the galaxy. It
didn't take long to figure out the- formula that predicted where it would come out: it travels along the
same "line" (actually an Einsteinian geodesic) it would have followed if the collapsar hadn't been in
the way—until it reaches another collapsar field, whereupon it reappears, repelled with the same
speed at which it approached the original collapsar. Travel time between the two collapsars . . .
exactly zero.
         It made a lot of work for mathematical physicists, who had to redefine simultaneity, then tear
down general relativity and build it back up again; And it made the politicians very happy, because
now they could send a shipload of colonists to Fomalhaut for less than it had once cost to put a brace
of men on the moon. There were a lot of people the politicians would love to see on Fomalhaut,
implementing a glorious adventure rather than stirring up trouble at home.
         The ships were always accompanied by an automated probe that followed a couple of million
miles behind. We knew about the portal planets, little bits of flotsam that whirled around the
collapsars; the purpose of the drone was to come back and tell us in the event that a ship had
smacked into a portal planet at .999 of the speed of light,
         That particular catastrophe never happened, but one day a drone limped back alone. Its data
were analyzed, and it turned out that the colonists' ship had been pursued by another vessel and
destroyed. This happened near Aldebaran, in the constellation Taurus, but since "Aldebaranian" is a
little hard to handle, they named the enemy "Tauran."
         Colonizing vessels thenceforth went out protected by an armed guard. Often the armed guard
went out alone, and finally the Colonization Group got shortened to UNEF, United Nations
Exploratory Force. Emphasis on the "force."
         Then some bright lad in the General Assembly decided that we ought to field an army of
footsoldiers to guard the portal planets of the nearer collapsars. This led to the Elite Conscription Act
of 1996 and the most elitely conscripted army in the history of warfare.
         So here we were, fifty men and fifty women, with IQs over 150 and bodies of unusual health
and strength, slogging elitely through the mud and slush of central Missouri, reflecting on the
usefulness of our skill in building bridges on worlds where the only fluid is an occasional standing
pool of liquid helium.

3
        About a month later, we left for our final training exercise, maneuvers on the planet Charon.
Though nearing perihelion, it was still more than twice as far from the sun as Pluto.
        The troopship was a converted "cattiewagon" made to carry two hundred colonists and
assorted bushes and beasts. Don't think it was roomy, though, just because there were half that many
of us. Most of the excess space was taken up with extra reaction mass and ordnance.
        The whole trip took three weeks, accelerating at two gees halfway, decelerating the other half.
Our top speed, as we roared by the orbit of Pluto, was around one-twentieth of the speed of light—
not quite enough for relativity to rear its complicated head.
        Three weeks of carrying around twice as much weight as normal. . . it's no picnic. We did
some cautious exercises three times a day and remained horizontal as much as possible. Still, we got
several broken bones and serious dislocations. The men had to wear special supporters to keep from
littering the floor with loose organs. It was almost impossible to sleep; nightmares of choking and
being crushed, rolling over periodically to prevent blood pooling and bedsores. One girl got so
fatigued that she almost slept through the experience of having a rib push out into the open air.
         I'd been in space several times before, so when we finally stopped decelerating and went into
free fall, it was nothing but relief. But some people had never been out, except for our training on the
moon, and succumbed to the sudden vertigo and disorientation. The rest of us cleaned up after them,
floating through the quarters with sponges and inspirators to suck up the globules of partly-digested
"Concentrate, High-protein, Low-residue, Beef Flavor (Soya)."
         We had a good view of Charon, coming down from orbit. There wasn't much to see, though.
It was just a dim, off-white sphere with a few smudges on it. We landed about two hundred meters
from the base. A pressurized crawler came out and mated with the ferry, so we didn't have to suit up.
We clanked and squeaked up to the main building, a featureless box of grayish plastic.
         Inside, the walls were the same drab color. The rest of the company was sitting at desks,
chattering away. There was a seat next to Freeland.
         "Jeff- feeling better?" He still looked a little pale.
         "If the gods had meant for man to survive in free fall, they would have given him a castiron
glottis." He sighed heavily. "A little better. Dying for a smoke."
         "Yeah."
         "You seemed to take it all right. Went up in school, didn't you?"
         "Senior thesis in vacuum welding, yeah. Three weeks in Earth orbit." I sat back and reached
for my weed box for the thousandth time. It still wasn't there. The Life Support Unit didn't want to
handle nicotine and THC.
         "Training was bad enough," Jeff groused, "but this shit—"
         "Tench-hut!" We stood up in a raggedy-ass fashion, by twos and threes. The door opened and
a full major came in. I stiffened a little. He was the highest-ranking officer I'd ever seen. He had a
row of ribbons stitched into his coveralls, including a purple strip meaning he'd been wounded in
combat, fighting in the old American army. Must have been that Indochina thing, but it had fizzled
out before I was born. He didn't look that old.
         "Sit, sit." He made a patting motion with his hand. Then he put his hands on his hips and
scanned the company, a small smile on his face. "Welcome to Charon, You picked a lovely day to
land, the temperature outside is a summery eight point one five degrees Absolute. I We expect little
change for the next two centuries or I so." Some of them laughed halfheartedly,
         "Best you enjoy the tropical climate here at Miami I base; enjoy it while you can. We're on the
center of sua- I side here, and most of your training will be on darkside. I Over there, the temperature
stays a chilly two point zero eight.
         "You might as well regard all the training you got on Earth and the moon as just an
elementary exercise, designed to give you a fair chance of surviving Charon. You'll have to go
through your whole repertory here: tools, weapons, maneuvers. And you'll find that, at these
temperatures, tools don't work the way they should;' weapons don't want to fire. And people move v-
e-r-y cautiously,"
         He studied the clipboard in his hand. "Right now, you have forty-nine women and forty-eight
men. Two deaths on Earth, one psychiatric release. Having read an outline of your training program,
I'm frankly surprised that so many of you pulled through.
         "But you might as well know that I won't be displeased if as few as fifty of you, half, graduate
from this I final phase. And the only way not to graduate is to die. I Here. The only way anybody gets
back to Earth —including me— is after a combat tour.
         "You will complete your training in one month. From here you go to Stargate collapsar, half a
light away. You will stay at the settlement on Stargate 1, the largest portal planet, until replacements
arrive. Hopefully, that will be no more than a month; another group is due here as soon as you leave.
         "When you leave Stargate, you will go to some strategically important collapsar, set up a
military base there, and fight the enemy, if attacked. Otherwise, you will maintain the base until
further orders.
         "The last two weeks of your training will consist of constructing exactly that kind of a base,
on darkside. There you will be totally isolated from Miami base: no communication, no medical
evacuation, no resupply. Sometime before the two weeks are up, your defense facilities will be
evaluated in an attack by guided drones. They will be armed,"
         They had spent all that money on us just to kill us in training?
         "All of the permanent personnel here on Charon are combat veterans. Thus, all of us are forty
to fifty years of age. But I think we can keep up with you. Two of us will be with you at all times and
will accompany you at least as far as Stargate. They are Captain Sherman Stott, your company
commander, and Sergeant Octavio Cortez, your first sergeant. Gentlemen?"
         Two men in the front row stood easily and turned to face us. Captain Stott was a little smaller
than the major, but cut from the same mold: face hard and smooth as porcelain, cynical half-smile, a
precise centimeter of beard framing a large chin, looking thirty at the most He wore a large,
gunpowder-type pistol on his hip.
         Sergeant Cortez was another story, a horror story. his head was shaved and the wrong shape,
flattened out on one side, where a large piece of skull had obviously been taken out. His face was
very dark and seamed with wrinkles and scars. Half his left ear was missing, and his eyes were as
expressive as buttons on a machine. He had a moustache-and-beard combination that looked like a
skinny white caterpillar taking a lap around his mouth. On anybody else, his schoolboy smile might
look pleasant, but he was about the ugliest, meanest-looking creature I'd ever seen. Still, if you didn't
look at his head and considered the lower six feet or so, he could have posed as the "after"
advertisement for a bodybuilding spa. Neither Stott nor Cortez wore any ribbons. Cortez had a small
pocket-laser suspended in a magnetic rig, sideways, under his left armpit It had wooden grips that
were worn smooth.
         "Now, before I turn you over to the tender mercies of these two gentlemen, let me caution you
again:
         "Two months ago there was not a living soul on this planet, just some leftover equipment
from the expedition of 1991. A working force of forty-five men struggled for a month to erect this
base. Twenty-four of them, more than half, died in the construction of it This is the most dangerous
planet men have ever tried to live on, but the places you'll be going will be this bad and worse. Your
cadre will try to keep you alive for the next month. Listen to them . . . and follow their example; all
of them have survived here much longer than you'll have to. Captain?" The captain stood up as the
major went out the door.
         "Tench-hut!" The last syllable was like an explosion and we all jerked to our feet.
         "Now I'm only gonna say this once so you better listen," he growled. "We are in a combat
situation here, and in a combat situation there is only one penalty for disobedience or
insurbordination." He jerked the pistol from his hip and held it by the barrel, like a club. "This Is an
Army model 1911 automatic pistol, caliber .45, and it is a primitive but effective weapon. The
Sergeant and I are authorized to use our weapons to kill to enforce discipline. Don't make us do it
because we will. We will." He put the pistol back. The holster snap made a loud crack in the dead
quiet.
         "Sergeant Cortez and I between us have killed more people than are sitting in this room. Both
of us fought in Vietnam on the American side and both of us joined the United Nations International
Guard more than ten years ago. I took a break in grade from major for the privilege of commanding
this company, and First Sergeant Cortez took a break from sub-major, because we are both combat
soldiers and this is the first combat situation since 1987.
         "Keep in mind what I've said while the First Sergeant instructs you more specifically in what
your duties will be under this command. Take over, Sergeant." He turned on his heel and strode out
of the room. The expression on his face hadn't changed one millimeter during the whole harangue.
         The First Sergeant moved like a heavy machine with lots of ball bearings. When the door
hissed shut, he swiveled ponderously to face us and said, "At ease, siddown," in a surprisingly gentle
voice. He sat on a table in the front of the room. It creaked, but held.
         "Now the captain talks scary and I look scary, but we both mean well. You'll be working
pretty closely with me, so you better get used to this thing I've got hanging in front of my brain. You
probably won't see the captain much, except on maneuvers."
         He touched the flat part of his head. "And speaking of brains, I still have just about all of
mine, in spite of Chinese efforts to the contrary. All of us old vets who mustered into UNEF had to
pass the same criteria that got you drafted by the Elite Conscription Act. So I suspect all of you are
smart and tough—but just keep in mind that the captain and I are smart and tough and experienced."
         He flipped through the roster without really looking at it. "Now, as the captain said, there'll be
only one kind of disciplinary action on maneuvers. Capital punishment. But normally we won't have
to kill you for disobeying; Charon'll save us the trouble.
         "Back in the billeting area, it'll be another story. We don't much care what you do inside. Grab
ass all day and fuck all night, makes no difference. . . . But once you suit up and go outside, you've
gotta have discipline that would shame a Centurian. There will be situations where one stupid act
could kill us all.
         "Anyhow, the first thing we've gotta do is get you fitted to your fighting suits. The armorer's
waiting at your billet; he'll take you one at a time. Let's go."

4
        "Now I know you got lectured back on Earth on what a fighting suit can do." The armorer was
a small man, partially bald, with no insignia of rank on his coveralls. Sergeant Cortez had told us to
call him "sir," since he was a lieutenant.
        "But I'd like to reinforce a couple of points, maybe add some things your instructors Earthside
weren't clear about or couldn't know. Your First Sergeant was kind enough to consent to being my
visual aid. Sergeant?"
        Cortez slipped out of his coveralls and came up to the little raised platform where a fighting
suit was standing, popped open like a man-shaped clam. He backed into it and slipped his arms into
the rigid sleeves. There was a click and the thing swung shut with a sigh. It was bright green with
CORTEZ stenciled in white letters on the helmet.
        "Camouflage, Sergeant." The green faded to white, then dirty gray. "This is good camouflage
for Charon and most of your portal planets," said Cortez, as if from a deep well. "But there are
several other combinations available." The gray dappled and brightened to a combination of greens
and browns: "Jungle." Then smoothed out to a hard light ochre: "Desert." Dark brown, darker, to a
deep flat black: "Night or space." "Very good, Sergeant. To my knowledge, this is the only feature of
the suit that *was perfected after your training. The control is around your left wrist and is admittedly
awkward. But once you find the right combination, it's easy to lock in.
        "Now, you didn't get much in-suit training Earthside. We didn't want you to get used to using
the thing in a friendly environment. The fighting suit is the deadliest personal weapon ever built, and
with no weapon is it easier for the user to kill himself through carelessness. Turn around, Sergeant.
        "Case in point." He tapped a large square protuberance between the shoulders. "Exhaust fins.
As you know, the suit tries to keep you at a comfortable temperature no matter what the weather's
like outside. The material of the suit is as near to a perfect insulator as we could get, consistent with
mechanical demands. Therefore, these fins get hot —especially hot, compared to darkside
temperatures— as they bleed off the body's heat.
        "All you have to do is lean up against a boulder of frozen gas; there's lots of it around. The
gas will sublime off faster than it can escape from the fins; in escaping, it will push against the
surrounding 'ice' and fracture it . . . and in about one-hundreth of a second, you have the equivalent of
a hand grenade going off right below your neck. You'll never feel a thing.
        "Variations on this theme have killed eleven people in the past two months. And they were
just building a bunch of huts.
        "I assume you know how easily the waldo capabilities can kill you or your companions.
Anybody want to shake hands with the sergeant?" He paused, then stepped over and clasped his
glove. "He's had lots of practice. Until you have, be extremely careful. You might scratch an itch and
wind up breaking your back. Remember, semi-logarithmic response: two pounds' pressure exerts five
pounds' force; three pounds' gives ten; four pounds', twenty-three; five pounds', forty-seven. Most of
you can muster up a grip of well over a hundred pounds. Theoretically, you could rip a steel girder in
two with that, amplified. Actually, you'd destroy the material of your gloves and, at least on Charon,
die very quickly. It'd be a race between decompression and flash-freezing. You'd die no matter which
won.
        "The leg waldos are also dangerous, even though the amplification is less extreme. Until
you're really skilled, don't try to run, or jump. You're likely to trip, and that means you're likely to
die."
        "Charon's gravity is three-fourths of Earth normal, so it's not too bad. But on a really small
world, like Luna, you could take a running jump and not come down for twenty minutes, just keep
sailing over the liorizon. Maybe bash into a mountain at eighty meters per second. On a small
asteroid, it'd be no trick at all to run up to escape velocity and be off on an informal tour of
intergalactic space. It's a slow way to travel.
        "Tomorrow morning, we'll start teaching you how to stay alive inside this infernal machine.
The rest of the afternoon and evening, I'll call you one at a time to be fitted. That's all, Sergeant."
        Cortez went to the door and turned the stopcock that let air into the airlock. A bank of
infrared lamps went on to keep air from freezing inside it. When the pressures were equalized, he
shut the stopcock, undamped the door and stepped in, clamping it shut behind him. A pump hummed
for about a minute, evacuating the airlock; then he stepped out and sealed the outside door. It was
pretty much like the ones on Luna. "First I want Private Omar Almizar. The rest of you can go find
your bunks. I'll call you over the squawker." "Alphabetical order, sir?"
        "Yep. About ten minutes apiece. If your name begins with Z, you might as well get sacked."
        That was Rogers. She probably was thinking about getting sacked.

5
        The sun was a hard white point directly overhead. It was a lot brighter than I had expected it
to be; since we were eighty AUs out, it was only one 6400th as bright as it is on Earth. Still, it was
putting out about as much light as a powerful streetiamp.
        "This is considerably more light than you'll have on a portal planet." Captain Stott's voice
crackled in our collective ear. "Be glad that you'll be able to watch your step."
        We were lined up, single-file, on the permaplast sidewalk that connected the billet and the
supply hut. We'd practiced walking inside, all morning, and this wasn't any different except for the
exotic scenery. Though the light was rather dim, you could see all the way to the horizon quite
clearly, with no atmosphere in the way. A black cliff "that looked too regular to be natural stretched
from one horizon to the other, passing within a kilometer of us. The ground was obsidian-black,
mottled with patches of white or bluish ice. Next to the supply hut was a small mountain of snow in a
bin marked oxygen.
        The suit was fairly comfortable, but it gave you the odd feeling of simultaneously being a
marionette and a puppeteer. You apply the impulse to move your leg and the suit picks it up and
magnifies it and moves your leg for you.
        "Today we're only going to walk around the company area, and nobody will leave the
company area." The captain wasn't wearing his .45 —unless he carried it as good luck charm, under
his suit— but he had a laser-finger like the rest of us. And his was probably hooked up. Keeping an
interval of at least two meters between each person, we stepped off the permaplast and followed the
captain over smooth rock. We walked carefully for about an hour, spiraling out, and finally stopped
at the far edge of the perimeter.
         "Now everybody pay close attention. I'm going out to that blue slab of ice" —it was a big one,
about twenty meters away— "and show you something that you'd better know if you want to stay
alive."
         He walked out in a dozen confident steps. "First I have to heat up a rock — filters down." I
squeezed the stud under my armpit and the filter slid into place over my image converter. The captain
pointed his finger at a black rock the size of a basketball, and gave it a short burst. The glare rolled a
long shadow of the captain over us and beyond. The rock shattered into a pile of hazy splinters.
         "It doesn't take long for these to cool down." He stopped and picked up a piece. "This one is
probably twenty or twenty-five degrees. Watch." He tossed the "warm" rock onto the ice slab. It
skittered around in a crazy pattern and shot off the side. He tossed another one, and it did the same.
         "As you know, you are not quite perfectly insulated. These rocks are about the temperature of
the soles of your boots. If you try to stand on a slab of hydrogen, the same thing will happen to you.
Except that the rock is already dead.
         "The reason for this behavior is that the rock makes a slick interface with the ice—a little
puddle of liquid hydrogen—and rides a few molecules above the liquid on a cushion of hydrogen
vapor. This makes the rock or you a frictionless bearing as far as the ice is concerned, and you can't
stand up without any friction under your boots.
         "After you have lived in your suit for a month or so you should be able to survive falling
down, but right now you just don't know enough. Watch."
         The captain flexed and hopped up onto the slab. His feet shot out from under him and he
twisted around in midair, landing on hands and knees. He slipped off and stood on the ground.
         "The idea is to keep your exhaust fins from making contact with the frozen gas. Compared to
the ice they are as hot as a blast furnace, and contact with any weight behind it will result in an
explosion."
         After that demonstration, we walked around for another hour or so and returned to the billet.
Once through the airlock, we had to mill around for a while, letting the suits get up to something like
room temperature. Somebody came up and touched helmets with me. "William?" She had MCCOY
stenciled above her faceplate,
         "Hi, Sean. Anything special?" "I just wondered if you had anyone to sleep with tonight."
         That's right; I'd forgotten. There wasn't any sleeping roster here. Everybody chose his own
partner. "Sure, I mean, uh, no . . . no, I haven't asked anybody. Sure, if you want to. . . ."
         "Thanks, William. See you later." I watched her walk away and thought that if anybody could
make a fighting suit look sexy, it'd be Sean. But even she couldn't.
         Cortez decided we were warm enough and led us to the suit room, where we backed the
things into place and hooked them up to the charging plates. (Each suit had a little chunk of
plutonium that would power it for several years, but we were supposed to run on fuel cells as much
as possible.) After a lot of shuffling around, everybody finally got plugged in and we were allowed to
unsuit—ninety-seven naked chickens squirming out of bright green eggs. It was cold—the air, the
floor and especially the suits—and we made a pretty disorderly exit toward the lockers.
         I slipped on tunic, trousers and sandals and was still cold. I took my cup and joined the line
for soya. Everybody was jumping up and down to keep warm.
         "How c-cold, do you think, it is, M-Mandella?" That was McCoy.
         "I don't, even want, to think, about it." I stopped jumping and rubbed myself as briskly as
possible, while holding a cup in one hand. "At least as cold as Missouri was."
         "Ung . . . wish they'd, get some, fucken, heat in, this place." It always affects the small women
more than anybody else. McCoy was the littlest one in the company, a waspwaist doll barely five feet
high.
        "They've got the airco going. It can't be long now." "I wish I, was a big,, slab of, meat like,
you." I was glad she wasn't.

6
        We had our first casualty on the third day, learning how to dig holes.
        With such large amounts of energy stored in a soldier's weapons, it wouldn't be practical for
him to hack out a hole in the frozen ground with the conventional pick and shovel. Still, you can
launch grenades all day and get nothing but shallow depressions - so the usual method is to bore a
hole in the ground with the hand laser, drop a timed charge in after it's cooled down and, ideally, fill
the hole with stuff. Of course, there's not much loose rock on Charon, unless you've already blown a
hole nearby.
        The only difficult thing about the procedure is in getting away. To be safe, we were told,
you've got to either be behind something really solid, or be at least a hundred meters away. You've
got about three minutes after setting the charge, but you can't just sprint away. Not safely, not on
Charon.
        The accident happened when we were making a really deep hole, the kind you want for a
large underground bunker. For this, we had to blow a hole, then climb down to the bottom of the
crater and repeat the procedure again and again until the hole was deep enough. Inside the crater we
used charges with a five-minute delay, but it hardly seemed enough time—you really had to go it
slow, picking your way up the crater's edge.
        Just about everybody had blown a double hole; everybody but me and three others. I guess we
were the only ones paying really close attention when Bovanovitch got into trouble. All of us were a
good two hundred meters away. With my image converter turned up to about forty power, I watched
her disappear over the rim of the crater. After that, I could only listen in on her conversation with
Cortez.
        "I'm on the bottom, Sergeant." Normal radio procedure was suspended for maneuvers like
this; nobody but the trainee and Cortez was allowed to broadcast.
        "Okay, move to the center and clear out the rubble. Take your time. No rush until you pull the
pin."
        "Sure, Sergeant." We could hear small echoes of rocks clattering, sound conduction through
her boots. She didn't say anything for several minutes.
        "Found bottom." She sounded a little out of breath.
        "Ice or rock?"
        "Oh, it's rock. Sergeant. The greenish stuff."
        "Use a low setting, then. One point two, dispersion four."
        "God darn it, Sergeant, that'll take forever." "Yeah, but that stuffs got hydrated crystals in it—
heat it up too fast and you might make it fracture. And we'd just have to leave you there, girl. Dead
and bloody."
        "Okay, one point two dee four." The inside edge of the crater flickered red with reflected laser
light.
        "When you get about half ammeter deep, squeeze it up to dee two."
        "Roger." It took her exactly seventeen minutes, three of them at dispersion two. I could
imagine how tired her shooting arm was.
        "Now rest for a few minutes. When the bottom of the hole stops glowing, arm the charge and
drop it in. Then walk out, understand? You'll have plenty of time."
        "I understand, Sergeant. Walk out." She sounded nervous. Well, you don't often have to tiptoe
away from a twenty-microton tachyon bomb. We listened to her breathing for a few minutes.
        "Here goes." Faint slithering sound, the bomb sliding down.
        "Slow and easy now. You've got five minutes."
        "Y-yeah. Five." Her footsteps started out slow and regular. Then, after she started climbing
the side, the sounds were less regular, maybe a little frantic. And with four minutes to go—
        "Shit!" A loud scraping noise, then clatters and bumps. "Shit-shit."
        "What's wrong, private?"
        "Oh, shit." Silence. "Shit!"
        "Private, you don't wanna get shot, you tell me whats wrong!"
        "I... shit, I'm stuck. Fucken rockslide ... shit.... DO SOMETHING! I can't move, shit I can't
move I, I—"
        "Shut up! How deep?"
        "Can't move my, shit, my fucken legs. HELP ME—now!”
        "Then goddammit use your arms—push! You can move a ton with each hand." Three
minutes.
        She stopped cussing and started to mumble, in Russian, I guess, a low monotone. She was
panting, and you could hear rocks tumbling away.
        "I'm free." Two minutes.
        "Go as fast as you can." Cortex's voice was flat, emotionless.
        At ninety seconds she appeared, crawling over the rim. "Run, girl. . . .You better run." She ran
five or six steps and fell, skidded a few meters and got back up, running; fell again, got up again—
        It looked as though she was going pretty fast, but she had only covered about thirty meters
when Cortez said, "All right, Bovanovitch, get down on your stomach and lie still." Ten seconds, but
she didn't hear or she wanted Jo get just a little more distance, and she kept running, careless leaping
strides, and at the high point of one leap there was a flash and a rumble, and something big hit her
below the neck, and her headless body spun off end over end through space, trailing a red-black
spiral of flash-frozen blood that settled gracefully to the ground, a path of crystal powder that nobody
disturbed while we gathered rocks to cover the juiceless thing at the end of it.
        That night Cortez didn't lecture us, didn't even show up for night-chop. We were all very
polite to each other and nobody was afraid to talk about it.
        I sacked with Rogers—everybody sacked with a good friend—but all she wanted to do was
cry, and she cried so long and so hard that she got me doing it, too.

7
        "Fire team A -move out!" The twelve of us advanced in a ragged line toward the simulated
bunker. It was about a kilometer away, across a carefully prepared obstacle course. We could move
pretty fast, since all of the ice had been cleared from the field, but even with ten days' experience we
weren't ready to do more than an easy jog.
        I carried a grenade launcher loaded with tenth-micro-ton practice grenades. Everybody had
their laser-fingers set at a point oh eight dee one, not much more than a flashlight. This was a
simulated attack —the bunker and its robot defender cost too much to use once and be thrown away.
        "Team B, follow. Team leaders, take over." We approached a clump of boulders at about the
halfway mark, and Potter, my team leader, said, "Stop and cover." We clustered behind the rocks and
waited for Team B.
        Barely visible in their blackened suits, the dozen men and women whispered by us. As soon
as they were clear, they jogged left, out of our line of sight
        "Fire!" Red circles of light danced a half-klick down-range, where the bunker was just visible.
Five hundred meters was the limit for these practice grenades; but I might luck out, so I lined the
launcher up on the image of the bunker, held it at a forty-five degree angle and popped off a salvo of
three.
        Return fire from the bunker started before my grenades even landed. Its automatic lasers were
no more powerful than the ones we were usingi but a direct hit would deactivate your image
converter, leaving you blind. It was setting down a random field of fire, not even coming close to the
boulders we were hiding behind.
        Three magnesium-bright flashes blinked simultaneously about thirty meters short of the
bunker. "Mandel-la! I thought you were supposed to be good with that thing."
        "Damn it, Potter it only throws half a klick. Once we get closer, I'll lay 'em right on top,
everytime."
        "Sure you will." I didn't say anything. She wouldn't be team leader forever. Besides, she
hadn't been such a bad girl before the power went to her head.
        Since the grenadier is the assistant team leader, I was slaved into Potter's radio and could hear
B team talk to her.
        "Potter, this is Freeman. Losses?"
        "Potter here -no, looks like they were concentrating on you."
        "Yeah, we lost three. Right now we're in a depression about eighty, a hundred meters down
from you. We can give cover whenever you're ready."
        "Okay, start." Soft click: "A team, follow me." She slid out from behind the rock and turned
on the faint pink beacon beneath her powerpack. I turned on mine and moved out to run alongside of
her, and the rest of the team fanned out in a trailing wedge. Nobody fired while A team laid down a
cover for us.
        All I could hear was Potter's breathing and the soft crunch-crunch of my boots. Couldn't see
much of anything, so I tongued the image converter up to a log two intensification. That made the
image kind of blurry but adequately bright. Looked like the bunker had B team pretty well pinned
down; they were getting quite a roasting. All of their return fire was laser. They must have lost their
grenadier.
        "Potter, this is Mandella. Shouldn't we take some of the heat off B team?"
        "Soon as I can find us good enough cover. Is that all right with you? Private?" She'd been
promoted to corporal for the duration of the exercise.
        We angled to the right and lay down behind a slab of rock. Most of the others found cover
nearby, but a few had to hug the ground.
        "Freeman, this is Potter."
        "Potter, this is Smithy. Freeman's out; Samuels is out. We only have five men left. Give us
some cover so we can get—"
        "Roger, Smithy." Click. "Open up, A team. The B's are really hurtin'."
        I peeked out over the edge of the rock. My rangefinder said that the bunker was about three
hundred fifty meters away, still pretty far. I aimed a smidgeon high and popped three, then down a
couple of degrees, three more. The first ones overshot by about twenty meters; then the second salvo
flared up directly in front of the bunker. I tried to hold on that angle and popped fifteen, the rest of
the magazine, in the same direction.
        I should have ducked down behind the rock to reload, but I wanted to see where the fifteen
would land, so I kept my eyes on the bunker while I reached back to un-clip another magazine—
        When the laser hit my image converter, there was a red glare so intense it seemed to go right
through my eyes and bounce off the back of my skull. It must have been only a few milliseconds
before the converter overloaded and went blind, but the bright green afterimage hurt my eyes for
several minutes.
        Since I was officially "dead," my radio automatically cut off, and I had to remain where I was
until the mock battle was over. With no sensory input besides the feel of my own skin (and it ached
where the image converter had shone on it) and the ringing in my ears, it seemed like an awfully long
time: Finally, a helmet clanked against mine.
        "You okay, Mandella?" Potter's voice. "Sorry, I died of boredom twenty minutes ago." "Stand
up and take my hand." I did so and we shuffled back to the billet. It must have taken over an hour.
She didn't say anything more, all the way back—it's a pretty awkward way to communicate—but
after we'd cycled through the airlock and warmed up, she helped me undo my suit. I got ready for a
mild tongue-lashing, but when the suit popped open, before I could even get my eyes adjusted to the
light, she grabbed me around the neck and planted a wet kiss on my mouth, "Nice shooting,
Mandella." "Huh?"
        "Didn't you see? Of course not. . . . The last salvo before you got hit—four direct hits. The
bunker decided it was knocked out, and all we had to do was walk the rest of the way."
        "Great." I scratched my face under the eyes, and some dry skin flaked off. She giggled.
        "You should see yourself. You look like—"
        "All personnel, report to the assembly area." That was the captain's voice. Bad news, usually.
        She handed me a tunic and sandals. "Let's go." The assembly area-chop hall was just down
the corridor. There was a row of roll-call buttons at the door; I pressed the one beside my name. Four
of the names were covered with black tape. That was good, only four. We hadn't lost anybody during
today's maneuvers.
        The captain was sitting on the raised dais, which at least meant we didn't have to go through
the tench-hut bullshit. The place filled up in less than a minute; a soft chime indicated the roll was
complete.
        Captain Stott didn't stand up. "You did fairly well today. Nobody killed, and I expected some
to be. In that respect you exceeded my expectations but in every other respect you did a poor job.
        "I am glad you're taking good care of yourselves, because each of you represents an
investment of over a million dollars and one-fourth of a human life.
        "But in this simulated battle against a very stupid robot enemy, thirty-seven of you managed
to walk into laser fire and be killed in a simulated way, and since dead people require no food you
will require no food, for the next three days. Each person who was a casualty in this battle will be
allowed pnly two liters of water and a vitamin ration each day."
        We knew enough not to groan or anything, but there were some pretty disgusted looks,
especially on the faces that had singed eyebrows and a pink rectangle of sunburn framing their eyes.
        "Mandella."
        "Sir?"
        "You are far and away the worst-burned casualty. Was your image converter set on normal?"
        Oh, shit. "No, sir. Log two."
        "I see. Who was your team leader for the exercises?"
        "Acting Corporal Potter, sir."
        "Private Potter, did you order him to use image intensification?"
        "Sir, I . . . I don't remember."
        "You don't. Well, as a memory exercise you may join the dead people. Is that satisfactory?"
        "Yes, sir."
        "Good. Dead people get one last meal tonight and go on no rations starting tomorrow. Are
there any questions?" He must have been kidding. "All right. Dismissed."
        I selected the meal that looked as if it had the most calories and took my tray over to sit by
Potter.
        "That was a quixotic damn thing to do. But thanks."
        "Nothing. I've been wanting to lose a few pounds any way." I couldn't see where she was
carrying any extra.
        "I know a good exercise," I said. She smiled without looking up from her tray. "Have anybody
for tonight?"
        "Kind of thought I'd ask Jeff. . . ."
        "Better hurry, then. He's lusting after Maejima." Well, that was mostly true. Everybody did.
        "I don't know. Maybe we ought to save our strength. That third day . . ."
        "Come on." I scratched the back of her hand lightly with a fingernail. "We haven't sacked
since Missouri. Maybe I've learned something new."
        "Maybe you have." She tilted her head up at me in a sly way. "Okay."
      Actually, she was the one with the new trick. The French corkscrew, she called it. She
wouldn't tell me who taught it to her though. I'd like to shake his hand. Once I got my strength back.

8
        The two weeks' training around Miami base eventually cost us eleven lives. Twelve, if you
count Dahlquist. I guess having to spend the rest of your life on Charon with a hand and both legs
missing is close enough to dying.
        Foster was crushed in a landslide and Freeland had a suit malfunction that froze him solid
before we could carry him inside. Most of the other deaders were people I didn't know all that well.
But they all hurt. And they seemed to make us more scared rather than more cautious.
        Now darkside. A flyer brought us over in groups of twenty and set us down beside a pile of
building materials thoughtfully immersed in a pool of helium II.
        We used grapples to haul the stuff out of the pool. It's not safe to go wading, since the stuff
crawls all over you and it's hard to tell what's underneath; you could walk out onto a slab of hydrogen
and be out of luck. I'd suggested that we try to boil away the pool with our lasers, but ten minutes of
concentrated fire didn't drop the helium level appreciably. It didn't boil, either; helium II is a
"superfluid," so what evaporation there was had to take place evenly, all over the surface. No hot
spots, so no bubbling.
        We weren't supposed to use lights, to "avoid detection." There was plenty of starlight with
your image converter cranked up to log three or four, but each stage of amplification meant some loss
of detail. By log four the landscape looked like a crude monochrome painting, and you couldn't read
the names on people's helmets unless they were right in front of you.
        The landscape wasn't all that interesting, anyhow. They were half a dozen medium-sized
meteor craters (all with exactly the same level of helium II in them) and the suggestion of some puny
mountains just over the horizon. The uneven ground was the consistency of frozen spiderwebs; every
time you put your foot down, you'd sink half an inch with a squeaking crunch. It could get on your
nerves.
        It took most of a day to pull all the stuff out of the pool. We took shifts napping, which you
could do either standing up, sitting or lying on your stomach. I didn't do well in any of those
positions, so I was anxious to get the bunker built and pressurized.
        We couldn't build the thing underground -it'd just fill up with helium II- so the first thing to
do was to build an insulating platform, a permaplast-vacuum sandwich three layers thick.
        I was an acting corporal, with a crew of ten people. We were carrying the permaplast layers to
the building site —two people can carry one easily— when one of "my" men slipped and fell on his
back.
        "Damn it, Singer, watch your step." We'd had a couple of deaders that way.
        "Sorry, Corporal. I'm bushed. Just got my feet tangled up."
        "Yeah, just watch it." He got back up all right, and he and his partner placed the sheet and
went back to get another.
        I kept my eye on Singer. In a few minutes he was practically staggering, not easy to do in that
suit of cybernetic armor.
        "Singer! After you set the plank, I want to see you."
        "OK." He labored through the task and mooched over.
        "Let me check your readout." I opened the door on: his chest to expose the medical monitor.
His tempera-1 ture was two degrees high; blood pressure and heart ratei both elevated. Not up to the
red line, though.
        "You sick or something?"
        "Hell, Mandella, I feel OK, just tired. Since I fell I been a little dizzy."
        I chinned the medic's combination. "Doc, this is Mandella. You wanna come over here for a
minute?"!
        "Sure, where are you?" I waved and he walked over from poolside.
        "What's the problem?" I showed him Singer's readout.
        He knew what all the other little dials and things meant, so it took him a while. "As far as I
can tell,' Mandella . . . he's just hot."
        "Hell, I coulda told you that," said Singer.
        "Maybe you better have the armorer take a look at his suit." We had two people who'd taken a
crash course in suit maintenance; they were our "armorers."
        I chinned Sanchez and asked him to come over with his tool kit.
        "Be a couple of minutes, Corporal. Carryin' a plank." "Well, put it down and get on over
here." I was getting an uneasy feeling. Waiting for him, the medic and I looked over Singer's suit.
        "Uh-oh," Doc Jones said. "Look at mis." I w around to the back and looked where he was
pointing^ Two of the fins on the heat exchanger were bent out of shape.
        "What's wrong?" Singer asked.
        "You fell on your heat exchanger, right?"
        "Sure, Corporal, that's it. It must not be working right."
        "I don't think it's working at all," said Doc.
        Sanchez came over with his diagnostic kit and we told him what had happened. He looked at
the heat exchanger, then plugged a couple of jacks into it and got a digital readout from a little
monitor in his kit. I didn't know what it was measuring, but it came out zero to eight decimal places.
        Heard a soft click, Sanchez chinning my private frequency. "Corporal, this guy's a deader."
        "What? Can't you fix the goddamn thing?"
        "Maybe . . . maybe I could, if I could take ft apart. But there's no way—"
        "Hey! Sanchez?" Singer was talking on the general freak. "Find out what's wrong?" He was
panting.
        Click. "Keep your pants on, man, we're working on it." Click.
        "He won't last long enough for us to get the bunker pressurized. And I can't work on the heat
exchanger from outside of the suit."
        "You've got a spare suit, haven't you?"
        "Two of 'em, the fit-anybody land. But there's no place . . . say . . ."
        "Right. Go get one of the suits warmed up." I chinned the general freak. "Listen, Singer,
we've gotta get you out of that thing. Sanchez has a spare suit, but to make the switch, we're gonna
have to build a house around you. Understand?" "Huh-uh."
        "Look, we'll make a box with you inside, and hook it up to the life-support unit. That way you
can breathe while you make the switch."
        "Soun's pretty compis . . . compil . . . cated t'me."
        "Look, just come along—"
        "I'll be all right, man, jus' lemme res'. . . ."
        I grabbed his arm and led him to the building site. He is really weaving. Doc took his other
arm, and between us, we kept him from falling over.
        "Corporal Ho, this is Corporal Mandella." Ho was in charge of the life-support unit.
        "Go away, Mandella, I'm busy."
        "You're going to be busier." I outlined the problem to her. While her group hurried to adapt
the LSU—for this purpose, it need only be an air hose and heater—I got my crew to bring around six
slabs of permaplast, so we Id build a big box around Singer and the extra suit would look like a huge
coffin, a meter square and six meters long.
        We set the suit down on the slab that would be the of the coffin. "OK, Singer, let's go."
        No answer.
        "Singer, let's go."
        No answer.
        "Singer!" He was just standing there. Doc Jones checked his readout.
         "He's out, man, unconscious."
         My mind raced. There might just be room for another person in the box. "Give me a hand
here." I took Singer's shoulders and Doc took his feet, and we carefully laid him out at the feet of the
empty suit.
         Then I lay down myself, above the suit. "OK, close 'er up."
         "Look, Mandella, if anybody goes in mere, it oughta be me."
         "Fuck you, Doc. My job. My man." That sounded all wrong. William Mandella, boy hero.
         They stood a slab up on edge -it had two openings for the LSU input and exhaust- and
proceeded to weld it to the bottom plank with a narrow laser beam. On Earth, we'd just use glue, but
here the only fluid was helium, which has lots of interesting properties, but is definitely not sticky.
         After about ten minutes we were completely walled up. I could feel the LSU humming. I
switched on my suit light —the first time since we landed on darkside— and the glare made purple
blotches dance in front of my eyes.
         "Mandella, this is Ho. Stay in your suit at least two or three minutes. We're putting hot air in,
but it's coming back just this side of liquid." I watched the purple fade for a while.
         "OK, it's still cold, but you can make it." I popped my suit. It wouldn't open all the way, but I
didn't have too much trouble getting out. The suit was still cold enough to take some skin off my
fingers and butt as I wiggled out.
         I had to crawl feet-first down the coffin to get to Singer. It got darker fast, moving away from
my light. When I popped his suit a rush of hot stink hit me in the face. In the dim light his skin was
dark red and splotchy. His breathing was very shallow and I could see his heart palpitating.
         First I unhooked the relief tubes —an unpleasant business— then the bio-sensors; and then I
had the problem of getting his arms out of their sleeves.
         It's pretty easy to do for yourself. You twist this way and turn that way and the arm pops out.
Doing it from the outside is a different matter: I had to twist his arm and then reach under and move
the suit's arm to match —it takes muscle to move a suit around from the outside.
         Once I had one arm out it was pretty easy; I just crawled forward, putting my feet on the suit's
shoulders, and pulled on his free arm. He slid out of the suit like an oyster slipping out of its shell.
         I popped the spare suit and after a lot of pulling and pushing, managed to get his legs in.
Hooked up the biosensors and the front relief tube. He'd have to do the other one himself; it's too
complicated. For the nth time I was glad not to have been born female; they have to have two of
those damned plumber's friends, instead of just one and a simple hose.
         I left his arms out of the sleeves. The suit would be useless for any kind of work, anyhow;
waldos have to be tailored to the individual.
         His eyelids fluttered. "Man . . . della. Where . . . the fuck. . ."
         I explained, slowly, and he seemed to get most of it "Now I'm gonna close you up and go get
into my suit. I'll have the crew cut the end off this thing and I'll haul you out. Got it?"
         He nodded. Strange to see that when you nod or shrug inside a suit, it doesn't communicate
anything.
         I crawled into my suit, hooked up the attachments and chinned the general freak. "Doc, I think
he's gonna be OK. Get us out of here now."
         "Will do." Ho's voice. The LSU hum was replaced by a chatter, then a throb. Evacuating the
box to prevent an explosion.
         One corner of the seam grew red, then white, and a bright crimson beam lanced through, not a
foot away from my head. I scrunched back as far as I could. The beam slid up the seam and around
three corners, back to where it started. The end of the box fell away slowly, trailing filaments of
melted 'plast.
         "Wait for the stuff to harden, Mandella."
         "Sanchez, I'm not that stupid."
         "Here you go." Somebody tossed a line to me. That would be smarter than dragging him out
by myself. I threaded a long bight under his arms and tied it behind his neck. Then I scrambled out to
help them pull, which was silly —they had a dozen people already lined up to haul.
        Singer got out all right and was actually sitting up while Doc Jones checked his readout.
People were asking me about it and congratulating me, when suddenly Ho said "Look!" and pointed
toward the horizon.
        It was a black ship, coming in fast. I just had time to think it wasn't fair, they weren't
supposed to attack until the last few days, and then the ship was right on top of us.

9
         We all flopped to the ground instinctively, but the ship didn't attack. It blasted braking rockets
and dropped to land on skids. Then it skied around to come to a rest beside the building site.
         Everybody had it figured out and was standing around sheepishly when the two suited figures
stepped out of the ship.
         A familiar voice crackled over the general freak. "Every one of you saw us coming in and not
one of you responded with laser fire. It wouldn't have done any good but it would have indicated a
certain amount of fighting spirit. You have a week or less before the real thing and since the sergeant
and I will be here I will insist that you show a little more will to live. Acting Sergeant Potter."
         "Here, sir."
         "Get me a detail of twelve people to unload cargo. We brought a hundred small robot drones
for target practice so that you might have at least a fighting chance when a live target comes over.
         "Move now. We only have thirty minutes before the ship returns to Miami."
         I checked, and it was actually more like forty minutes.
         Having the captain and sergeant there didn't really make much difference. We were still on
our own; they were just observing.
         Once we got the floor down, it only took one day to complete the bunker. It was a gray
oblong, featureless except for the airlock blister and four windows. On top was a swivel-mounted
gigawatt laser. The operator — you couldn't call him a "gunner"— sat in a chair holding dead-man
switches in both hands. The laser wouldn't fire as long as he was holding one of those switches. If he
let go, it would automatically aim for any moving aerial object and fire at will. Primary detection and
aiming was by means of a kilometer-high antenna mounted beside the bunker.
         It was the only arrangement that could really be expected to work, with the horizon so close
and human reflexes so slow. You couldn't have the thing fully automatic, because in theory, friendly
ships might also approach.
         The aiming computer could choose among up to twelve targets appearing simultaneously
(firing at the largest ones first). And it would get all twelve in the space of half a second.
         The installation was partly protected from enemy fire by an efficient ablative layer that
covered everything except the human operator. But then, they were dead-man switches. One man
above guarding eighty inside. The army's good at that kind of arithmetic.
         Once the bunker was finished, half of us stayed inside at all times —feeling very much like
targets— taking turns operating the laser, while the other half went on maneuvers.
         About four klicks from the base was a large "lake" of frozen hydrogen; one of our most
important maneuvers was to learn how to get around on the treacherous stuff.
         It wasn't too difficult. You couldn't stand up on it, so you had to belly down and sled.
         If you had somebody to push you from the edge, getting started was no problem. Otherwise,
you had to scrabble with your hands and feet, pushing down as hard as was practical, until you started
moving, in a series of little jumps. Once started, you'd keep going until you ran out of ice. You could
steer a little bit by digging in, hand and foot, on the appropriate side, but you couldn't slow to a stop
that way. So it was a good idea not to go too fast and wind up positioned in such a way that your
helmet didn't absorb the shock of stopping.
         We went through all the things we'd done on the Miami side: weapons practice, demolition,
attack patterns. We also launched drones at irregular intervals, toward the bunker. Thus, ten or fifteen
times a day, the operators got to demonstrate their skill in letting go of the handles as soon as the
proximity light went on.
        I had four hours of that, like everybody else. I was nervous until the first "attack," when I saw
how little there was to it. The light went on, I let go, the gun aimed, and when the drone peeped over
the horizon — zzt! Nice touch of color, the molten metal spraying through space. Otherwise not too
exciting.
        So none of us were worried about the upcoming "graduation exercise," thinking it would be
just more of the same.
        Miami base attacked on the thirteenth day with two simultaneous missiles streaking over
opposite sides of the horizon at some forty kilometers per second. The laser vaporized the first one
with no trouble, but the second got within eight klicks of the bunker before it was hit. We were
coming back from maneuvers, about a klick away from the bunker. I wouldn't have seen it happen if I
hadn't been looking directly at the bunker the moment of the attack.
        The second missile sent a shower of molten debris straight toward the bunker. Eleven pieces
hit, and, as we later reconstructed it, this is what happened:
        The first casualty was Maejima, so well-loved Maejima, inside the bunker, who was hit in the
back and the head and died instantly. With the drop in pressure, the LSU went into high gear.
Friedman was standing in front of the main airco outlet and was blown into the opposite wall hard
enough to knock him unconscious; he died of decompression before the others could get him to his
suit.
        Everybody else managed to stagger through the gale and get into their suits, but Garcia's suit
had been holed and didn't do him any good.
        By the time we got there, they had turned off the LSU and were welding up the holes in the
wall. One man was trying to scrape up the unrecognizable mess that had been Maejima. I could hear
him sobbing and retching. They had already taken Garcia and Friedman outside for burial. The
captain took over the repair detail from Potter. Sergeant Cortez led the sobbing man over to a corner
and came back to work on cleaning up Mae-jima's remains, alone. He didn't order anybody to help
and nobody volunteered.

10
         As a graduation exercise, we were unceremoniously stuffed into a ship —Earth's Hope, the
same one we rode to Charon— and bundled off to Stargate at a little more than one gee.
         The trip seemed endless, about six months subjective time, and boring, but not as hard on the
carcass as going to Charon had been. Captain Stott made us review our training orally, day by day,
and we did exercises every day until we were worn to a collective frazzle.
         Stargate 1 was like Charon's darkside, only more so. The base on Stargate 1 was smaller than
Miami base —only a little bigger than the one we constructed on dark-side— and we were due to lay
over a week to help expand the facilities. The crew there was very glad to see us, especially the two
females, who looked a little worn around the edges.
         We all crowded into the small dining hall, where Sub-major Williamson, the man in charge of
Stargate 1, gave us some disconcerting news:
         "Everybody get comfortable. Get off the tables, though, there's plenty of floor.
         "I have some idea of what you just went through, training on Charon. I won't say it's all been
wasted. But where you're headed, things will be quite different. Warmer."
         He paused to let that soak in.
         "Aleph Aurigae, the first collapsar ever detected, revolves around the normal star Epsuon
Aurigae in a twenty-seven year orbit The enemy has a base of operations, not on a regular portal
planet of Aleph, but on a planet in orbit around Epsilon. We don't know -much about the planet, just
that it goes around Epsilon once every 745 days, is about three-fourths the size of Earth, and has an
albedo of 0.8, meaning it's probably covered with clouds. We can't say precisely how hot it will be,
but judging from its distance from Epsilon, it's probably rather hotter than Earth. Of course, we don't
know whether you'll be working... fighting on lightside or darkside, equator or poles. It's highly
unlikely that the atmosphere will be breathable—at any rate, you'll stay inside your suits. "Now you
know exactly as much about where you're going as I do. Questions?"
         "Sir," Stein drawled, "now we know where we're goin' . . . anybody know what we're goin' to
do when we get there?"
         Williamson shrugged. "That's up to your captain— and your sergeant, and the captain of
Earth's Hope, and Hope's logistic computer. We just don't have enough data yet to project a course of
action for you. It may be a long and bloody battle; it may be just a case of walking in to pick up the
pieces. Conceivably, the Taurans might want to make a peace offer,"—Cortez snorted— "in which
case you would simply be part of our muscle, our bargaining power." He looked at Cortez mildly.
"No one can say for sure."
         The orgy that night was amusing, but it was like trying to sleep in the middle of a raucous
beach party. The only area big enough to sleep all of us was the dining hall; they draped a few
bedsheets here and there for privacy, then unleashed Stargate's eighteen sex-starved men on our
women, compliant and promiscuous by military custom (and law), but desiring nothing so much as
sleep on solid ground.
         The eighteen men acted as if they were compelled to try as many permutations as possible,
and their performance was impressive (in a strictly quantitative sense, that is). Those of us who were
keeping count led a cheering section for some of the more gifted members. I think that's the right
word.
         The next morning —and every other morning we were on Stargate 1— we staggered out of
bed and into our suits, to go outside and work on the "new wing." Eventually, Stargate would be
tactical and logistic headquarters for the war, with thousands of permanent personnel, guarded by
half-a-dozen heavy cruisers in Hope's class. When we started, it was two shacks and twenty people;
when we left, it was four shacks and twenty people. The work was hardly work at all, compared to
darkside, since we had plenty of light and got sixteen hours inside for every eight hours' work. And
no drone attack for a final exam.
         When we shuttled back up to the Hope, nobody was too happy about leaving (though some of
the more popular females declared it'd be good to get some rest). Stargate was the last easy, safe
assignment we'd have before taking up arms against the Taurans. And as Williamson had pointed out
the first day, there was no way of predicting what that would be like.
         Most of us didn't feel too enthusiastic about making a collapsar jump, either. We'd been
assured that we wouldn't even feel it happen, just free fall all the way.
         I wasn't convinced. As a physics student, I'd had the usual courses in general relativity and
theories of gravitation. We only had a little direct data at that tune —Stargate was discovered when I
was in grade school— but the mathematical model seemed clear enough.
         The collapsar Stargate was a perfect sphere about three kilometers in radius. It was suspended
forever in a state of gravitational collapse that should have meant its surface was dropping toward its
center at nearly the speed of light. Relativity propped it up, at least gave it the illusion of being there .
. . the way all reality becomes illusory and observer-oriented when you study general relativity. Or
Buddhism. Or get drafted.
         At any rate, there would be a theoretical point in space-time when one end of our ship was
just above the surface of the collapsar, and the other end was a kilometer away (in our frame of
reference). In any sane universe, this would set up tidal stresses and tear the ship apart, and we would
be just another million kilograms of degenerate matter on the theoretical surface, rushing headlong to
nowhere for the rest of eternity or dropping to the center in the next trillionth of a second. You pays
your money and you takes your frame of reference.
         But they were right. We blasted away from Stargate 1, made a few course corrections 'and
then just dropped, for about an hour.
        Then a bell rang and we sank into our cushions under a steady two gravities of deceleration.
We were in enemy territory.

11
         We'd been decelerating at two gravities for almost nine days when the battle began. Lying on
our couches being miserable, all we felt were two soft bumps, missiles being released. Some eight
hours later, the squawk-box crackled: "Attention, all crew. This is the captain." Quinsana, the pilot,
was only a lieutenant, but was allowed to call himself captain aboard the vessel, where he outranked
all of us, even Captain Stott. "You grunts in the cargo hold can listen, too.
         "We just engaged the enemy with two fifty-gigaton tachyon missiles and have destroyed both
the enemy vessel and another object which it had launched approximately three microseconds before.
         "The enemy has been trying to overtake us for the past 179 hours, ship time. At the time of
the engagement, the enemy was moving at a little over half the speed of light, relative to Aleph, and
was only about thirty AU's from Earth's Hope. It was moving at .47c relative to us, and thus we
would have been coincident in space-time" —rammed!— "in a little more than nine hours. The
missiles were launched at 0719 ship's time, and destroyed the enemy at 1540, both tachyon bombs
detonating within a thousand klicks of the enemy objects."
         The two missiles were a type whose propulsion system was itself only a barely-controlled
tachyon bomb. They accelerated' at a constant rate of 100 gees, and were traveling at a relativistic
speed by the time the nearby mass of the enemy ship detonated them.
         "We expect no further interference from enemy vessels. Our velocity with respect to Aleph
will be zero in another five hours; we will then begin the journey back. The return will take twenty-
seven days." General moans and dejected cussing. Everybody knew all that already, of course; but we
didn't care to be reminded of it.
         So after another month of logy calisthenics and drill, at a constant two gravities, we got our
first look at the planet we were going to attack. Invaders from outer space, yes sir.
         It was a blinding white crescent waiting for us two AU's out from Epsilon. The captain had
pinned down the location of the enemy base from fifty AU's out, and we had jockeyed in on a wide
arc, keeping the bulk of the planet between them and us. That didn't mean we were sneaking up on
them —quite the contrary; they launched three abortive attacks—but it put us in a stronger defensive
position. Until we had to go to the surface, that is. Then only the ship and its Star Fleet crew would
be reasonably safe.
         Since the planet rotated rather slowly —once every ten and one-half days— a "stationary"
orbit for the ship had to be 150,000 klicks out This made the people in the ship feel quite secure, with
6,000 miles of rock and 90,000 miles of space between them and the enemy. But it meant a whole
second's time lag in communication between us on the ground and the ship's battle computer. A
person could get awful dead while that neutrino pulse crawled up and back.
         Our vague orders were to attack the base and gain control, while damaging a minimum of
enemy equipment. We were to take at least one enemy alive. We were under no circumstances to
allow ourselves to be taken alive, however. And the decision wasn't up to us; one special pulse from
the battle computer, and that speck of plutonium in your power plant would fiss with all of .01 %
efficiency, and you'd be nothing but a rapidly expanding, very hot plasma.
         They strapped us into six scoutships —-one platoon of twelve people in each— and we
blasted away from Earth's Hope at eight gees. Each scoutship was supposed to follow its own
carefully random path to our rendezvous point, 108 klicks from the base. Fourteen drone ships were
launched at the same time, to confound the enemy's anti-spacecraft system.
         The landing went off almost perfectly. One ship suffered minor damage, a near miss boiling
away some of the ablative material on one side of the hull, but it'd still be able to make it and return,
keeping its speed down while in the atmosphere.
         We zigged and zagged and wound up first ship at the rendezvous point. There was only one
trouble. It was under four kilometers of water.
         I could almost hear that machine, 90,000 miles away, grinding its mental gears, adding this
new bit of data. We proceeded just as if we were landing on solid ground: braking rockets, falling,
skids out, hit the water, skip, hit the water, skip, hit the water, sink.
         It would have made sense to go ahead and land on the bottom —we were streamlined, after
all, and water just another fluid— but the hull wasn't strong enough to hold up a four kilometer
column of water. Sergeant Cortez was in the scoutship with us.
         "Sarge, tell that computer to do something! We're gonna get—"
         "Oh, shut up, Mandella. Trust in th' lord." "Lord" was definitely lower-case when Cortez said
it.
         There was a loud bubbly sigh, then another, and a slight increase in pressure on my back that
meant the ship was rising. "Flotation bags?" Cortez didn't deign to answer, or didn't know.
         That was it. We rose to within ten or fifteen meters of the surface and stopped, suspended
there. Through the port I could see the surface above, shimmering like a mirror of hammered silver.
I wondered what it would be like to be a fish and have a definite roof over your world.
         I watched another ship splash in. It made a great cloud of bubbles and turbulence, then fell —
slightly tail-first— for a short distance before large bags popped out under each delta wing. Then it
bobbed up to about our level and stayed.
         "This is Captain Stott. Now listen carefully. There is a beach some twenty-eight klicks from
your present position, in the direction of the enemy. You will be proceeding to this beach by
scoutship and from there will mount your assault on the Tauran position." That was some
improvement; we'd only have to walk eighty klicks.
         We deflated the bags, blasted to the surface and flew in a slow, spread-out formation to the
beach. It took several minutes. As the ship scraoed to a halt, I could hear pumps humming, making
the cabin pressure equal to the air pressure outside. Before it had quite stopped moving, the escape
slot beside my couch slid open. I rolled out Onto the wing of the craft and jumped to the ground. Ten
seconds to find cover—I sprinted across loose gravel to the "rreeline," a twisty bramble of tall sparse
bluish-green shrubs. T dove into the briar patch and turned to watch the ships leave. The drones that
were left rose slowly to about a hundred meters, then took off in all directions with a bone-jarring
roar. The real scoutships slid slowly back into the water. Maybe that was a good idea.
         It wasn't a terribly attractive world but certainly would be easier to get around in than the
cyrogenic nightmare we were trained for. The skv was a uniform dull silver .brightness that merged
with the mist over the ocean so completely it was impossible to tell where water ended and air began.
Small wavelets licked at the black gravel shore, much too slow and graceful in the three-quarters
Earth-normal gravity. Even from fifty meters away, the rattle of billions of pebbles rolling with the
tide was loud in my ears.
         The air temperature was 79 degrees Centigrade, not quite hot enough for the sea to boil, even
though the air pressure was low compared to Earth's. Wisps of steam drifted quicklv upward from the
line where water met land. I wondered how a lone man would survive exposed here without a suit.
Would the heat or the low oxygen (partial pressure one-eighth Earth normal) kill him first? Or was
there some deadly microorganism that would beat them both . . . ?
         "This is Cortez. Everybody come over and assemble on me." He was standing on the beach a
little to the left of me, waving his hand in a circle over his head. I walked toward him through the
shrubs. They were brittle, unsubstantial, seemed paradoxically dried-out in the steamy air. They
wouldn't offer much in the way of cover.
         "Well be advancing on a heading .05 radians east of north. I want Platoon One to take point.
Two and Three follow about twentv meters behind, to the left arid right. Seven, command platoon, is
in the middle, twenty meters behind Two and Three. Five and Six, bring up the rear, in a semicircular
closed flank. Everybody straight?" Sure, we could do that "arrowhead" maneuver in our sleep. "OK,
let's move out."
        I was in Platoon Seven, the "command group." Captain Stort put me there not because I was
expected to give any commands, but because of my training in physics.
        The command group was supposedly the safest place, buffered by six platoons: people were
assigned to it because there was some tactical reason for them to survive at least a little longer than
the rest. Cortez was there to give orders. Chavez was there to correct suit malfunctions. The senior
medic, Doc Wilson (the only medic who actually had an M.D.) was there, and so was Theodopolis,
the radio engineer, our link with the captain, who had elected to stay in orbit.
        The rest of us were assigned to the command group by dint of special training or aptitude that
wouldn't normally be considered of a "tactical" nature. Facing a totally unknown enemy, there was no
way of telling what might prove important. Thus I was there because I was the closest the company
had to a physicist. Rogers was biology. Tate was chemistry. Ho could crank out a perfect score on the
Rhine extrasensory perception test, every time. Bohrs was a polyglot, able to speak twenty-one
languages fluently, idiomatically. Petrov's talent was that he had tested out to have not one molecule
of xenophobia in his psyche. Keating was a skilled acrobat. Debby Hollister—"Lucky" Hollister—
showed a remarkable aptitude for making money, and also had a consistently high Rhine potential.

12
        When we first set out, we were using the "jungle" camouflage combination on our suits. But
what passed for jungle in these anemic tropics was too sparse; we looked like a band of conspicuous
harlequins trooping through the woods. Cortez had us switch to black, but that was just as bad, as the
light of Epsilon came evenly from all parts of the sky, and there were no shadows except ours. We
finally settled on the dun-colored desert camouflage.
        The nature of the countryside changed slowly as we walked north, away from the sea. The
thorned stalks—I guess you could call them trees—came in fewer numbers but were bigger around
and less brittle; at the base of each was a tangled mass of vine with the same blue-green color, which
spread out in a flattened cone some ten meters in diameter. There was a delicate green flower the size
of a man's head near the top of each tree.
        Grass began to grow some five klicks from the sea. It seemed to respect the trees' "property
rights," leaving a strip of bare earth around each cone of vine. At the edge of such a clearing, it would
grow as timid blue-green stubble, then, moving away from the tree, would get thicker and taller until
it reached shoulderhigh in some places, where the separation between two trees was unusually large.
The grass was a lighter, greener shade than the trees and vines. We changed the color of our suits to
the bright green we had used for maximum visibility on Charon. Keeping to the thickest part of the
grass, we were fairly inconspicuous.
        We covered over twenty klicks each day, buoyant after months under two gees. Until the
second day, the only form of animal life we saw was a kind of black worm, finger-sized, with
hundreds of cilium legs like the bristles of a brush. Rogers said that there obviously had to be some
larger creature around, or there would be no reason for the trees to have thorns. So we were doubly
on guard, expecting trouble both from the Taurans and the unidentified "large creature."
        Potter's second platoon was on point; the general freak was reserved for her, since her platoon
would likely be the first to spot any trouble.
        "Sarge, this is Potter," we all heard. "Movement ahead."
        "Get down, then!"
        "We are. Don't think they see us."
        "First platoon, go up to the right of point Keep down. Fourth, get up to the left. Tell me when
you get in position. Sixth platoon, stay back and guard the rear. Fifth and third, close with the
command group."
        Two dozen people whispered out of the grass to join us. Cortez must have heard from the
fourth platoon.
          "Good. How about you, first? . . . OK, fine. How many are there?"
          "Eight we can see." Potter's voice.
          "Good. When I give the word, open fire. Shoot to kill."
          "Sarge,. . . they're just animals."
          "Potter—if you've known all this time what a Tauran looks like, you should've told us. Shoot
to kill."
          "But we need . . ."
          "We need a prisoner, but we don't need to escort him forty klicks to his home base and keep
an eye on him while we fight. Clear?"
          "Yes. Sergeant."
          "OK. Seventh, all you brains and weirds, we're going up and watch. Fifth and third, come
along to guard."
          We crawled through the meter-high grass to where the second platoon had stretched out in a
firing line.
          "I don't see anything," Cortez said.
          "Ahead and just to the left. Dark green."
          They were only a shade darker than the grass. But after you saw the first one, you could see
them all, moving slowly around some thirty meters ahead.
          "Fire!" Cortez fired first; then twelve streaks of crimson leaped out and the grass wilted black,
disappeared, and the creatures convulsed and died trying to scatter.
          "Hold fire, hold it!" Cortez stood up. "We want to have something left—second platoon,
follow me." He strode out toward the smoldering corpses, laser-finger pointed out front, obscene
divining rod pulling him toward the carnage.... I felt my gorge rising and knew that all the lurid
training tapes, all the horrible deaths in training accidents, hadn't prepared me for this sudden reality .
. . that I had a magic wand that I could point at a life and make it a smoking piece of half-raw meat; I
wasn't a soldier nor ever wanted to be one nor ever would want—
          "OK, seventh, come on up." While we were walking toward them, one of the creatures
moved, a tiny shidder, and Cortez flicked the beam of his laser over it with an almost negligent
gesture. It made a hand-deep gash across the creature's middle. It died, like the others, without
emitting a sound.
          They were not quite as tall as humans, but wider ia girth. They were covered with dark green,
almost black, fur —white curls where the laser had singed. They appeared to have three legs and an
arm. The only ornament to their shaggy heads was a mouth, wet black orifice filled with flat black
teeth. They were thoroughly repulsive, but their worst feature was not a difference from human
beings, but a similarity. . . .Whenever the laser had opened a body cavity, milk-white glistening
veined globes and coils of organs spilled out, and their blood was dark clotting red.
          "Rogers, take a look. Taurans or not?"
          Rogers knelt by one of the disemboweled creatures and opened a flat plastic box, filled with
glittering dissecting tools. She selected a scalpel. "One way we might be able to find out." Doc
Wilson watched over her shoulder as she methodically slit the membrane covering several organs.
          "Here." She held up a blackish fibrous mass between two fingers, a parody of daintiness
through all that armor.
          "So?"
          "It's grass, Sergeant. If the Taurans eat the grass and breathe the air, they certainly found a
planet remarkably like their home." She tossed it away. "They're animals, Sergeant, just fucken
animals."
          "I don't know," Doc Wilson said. "Just because they walk around on all fours, threes maybe,
and eat grass . . ."
          "Well, let's check out the brain." She found one that had been hit in the head and scraped the
superficial black char from the wound. "Look at that."
         It was almost solid bone. She tugged and ruffled the hair all over the head of another one.
"What the hell does it use for sensory organs? No eyes, or ears, or . . ." She stood up.
         "Nothing in that fucken head but a mouth and ten centimeters of skull. To protect nothing, not
a fucken thing."
         "If I could shrug, I'd shrug," the doctor said. "It doesn't prove anything—a brain doesn't have
to look like a mushy walnut and it doesn't have to be in the head. Maybe that skull isn't bone, maybe
that's the brain, some crystal lattice. . ."
         "Yeah, but the fucken stomach's in the right place, and if those aren't intestines I'll eat—"
         "Look," Cortez said, "this is real interesting, but all we need to know is whether that thing's
dangerous, then we've gotta move on; we don't have all—"
         "They aren't dangerous," Rogers began. "They don't—"
         "Medic! DOC!" Somebody back at the firing line was waving his arms. Doc sprinted back to
him, the rest of us following.
         "What's wrong?" He had reached back and undipped his medical kit on the run.
         "It's Ho. She's out."
         Doc swung open the door on Ho's biomedical monitor. He didn't have to look far. "She's
dead."
         "Dead?" Cortez said. "What the hell—"
         "Just a minute." Doc plugged a jack into the monitor and fiddled with some dials on his kit.
"Everybody's biomed readout is stored for twelve hours. I'm running it backwards, should be able to
—there!"
         "What?"
         "Four and a half minutes ago —must have been when you opened fire— Jesus!"
         "Well?"
         "Massive cerebral hemorrhage. No . . ." He watched the dials. "No . . .warning, no indication
of anything out of the ordinary; blood pressure up, pulse up, but normal under the circumstances . . .
nothing to ... indicate—" He reached down and popped her suit. Her fine oriental features were
distorted in a horrible grimace, both gums showing. Sticky fluid ran from under her collapsed
eyelids, and a trickle of blood still dripped from each ear. Doc Wilson closed the suit back up.
         "I've never seen anything like it It's as if a bomb went off in her skull."
         "Oh fuck," Rogers said, "she was Rhine-sensitive, wasn't she."
         "That's right," Cortez sounded thoughtful. "All right, everybody listen up. Platoon leaders,
check your platoons and see if anybody's missing, or hurt. Anybody else in seventh?"
         "I ... I've got a splitting headache, Sarge," Lucky said.
         Four others had bad headaches. One of them affirmed that he was slightly Rhine-sensitive.
The others didn't know.
         "Cortez, I think it's obvious," Doc Wilson said, "that we should give these . . . monsters wide
berth, especially shouldn't harm any more of them. Not with five .people susceptible to whatever
apparently killed Ho."
         "Of course, God damn it, I don't need anybody to tell me that. We'd better get moving. I just
filled the captain in on what happened; he agrees that we'd better get as far away from here as we can,
before we stop for the night.
         "Let's get back in formation and continue on the same bearing. Fifth platoon, take over point;
second, come back to the rear. Everybody else, same as before." "What about Ho?" Lucky asked.
"She'll be taken care of. From the ship." After we'd gone half a klick, there was a flash and rolling
thunder. Where Ho had been came a wispy luminous mushroom cloud boiling up to disappear
against the gray sky.

13
       We stopped for the "night " —actually, the sun wouldn't set for another seventy hours— atop
a slight rise some ten klicks from where we had killed the aliens. But they weren't aliens, I had to
remind myself —we were.
          Two platoons deployed in a ring around the rest of us, and we flopped down exhausted.
Everybody was allowed four hours' sleep and had two hours' guard duty.
          Potter came over and sat next to me. I chinned her frequency.
          "Hi, Marygay."
          "Oh, William," her voice over the radio was hoarse and cracking. "God, it's so horrible."
          "It's over now—"
          "I killed one of them, the first instant, I shot it right in the, in the . . ."
          I put my hand on her knee. The contact had a plastic click and I jerked it back, visions of
machines embracing, copulating. "Don't feel singled out, Marygay; whatever guilt there is, is ...
belongs evenly to all of us, ... but a triple portion for Cor—"
          "You privates quit jawin' and get some sleep. You both pull guard in two hours."
          "OK, Sarge." Her voice was so sad and tired I couldn't bear it. I felt if I could only touch her, I
could drain off the sadness like ground wire draining current, but we were each trapped in our own
plastic world—
          "G'night, William."
          "Night." It's almost impossible to get sexually excited inside a suit, with the relief tube and all
the silver chloride sensors poking you, but somehow this was my body's response to the emotional
impotence, maybe remembering more pleasant sleeps with Marygay, maybe feeling that in the midst
of all this death, personal death could be very soon, cranking up the procreative derrick for one last
try ... lovely thoughts like this. I fell asleep and dreamed that I was a machine, mimicking the
functions of life, creaking and clanking my clumsy way through a world, people too polite to say
anything but giggling behind my back, and the little man who sat inside my head pulling the levers
and clutches and watching the dials, he was hopelessly mad and was storing up hurts for the day—
          "Mandella—wake up, goddammit, your shift!'"
          I shuffled over to my place on the perimeter to watch for god knows what . . . but I was so
weary I couldn't keep my eyes open. Finally I tongued a stimtab, knowing I'd pay for it later.
          For over an hour I sat there, scanning my sector left, right, near, far, the scene never changing,
not even a breath of wind to stir the grass.
          Then suddenly the grass parted and one of the three-legged creatures was right in front of me.
I raised my finger but didn't squeeze.
          "Movement!"
          "Movement!"
          "Jesus Chri—there's one right—" "HOLD YOUR FIRE! F' shit's sake don't shoot!"
          "Movement."
          "Movement." I looked left and right, and as far as I could see, every perimeter guard had one
of the blind, dumb creatures standing right in front of him.
          Maybe the drug I'd taken to stay awake made me more sensitive to whatever they did. My
scalp crawled and I felt a formless thing in my mind, the feeling you get when somebody has said
something and you didn't quite hear it, want to respond, but the opportunity to ask him to repeat it is
gone.
          The creature sat back on its haunches, leaning forward on the one front leg. Big green bear
with a withered arm. Its power threaded through my mind, spider-webs, echo of night terrors, trying
to communicate, trying to destroy me, I couldn't know.
          "All right, everybody on the perimeter, fall back, slow. Don't make any quick gestures. . . .
Anybody got a headache or anything?"
          "Sergeant, this is Hollister." Lucky. "They're trying to say something. . .lean almost. . . no,
just . . ."
          "All I can get is that they think we're, think we're . . . well, funny. They're not afraid."
         "You mean the one in front of you isn't—"
         "No, the feeling comes from all of them, they're all thinking the same thing. Don't ask me
how I know, I just do."
         "Maybe they thought it was funny, what they did to Ho."
         "Maybe. I don't feel they're dangerous. Just curious about us."
         "Sergeant, this is Bohrs." "Yeah."
         "The Taurans've been here at least a year—maybe they've learned how to communicate with
these . . . overgrown teddy bears. They might be spying on us, might be sending back—"
         "I don't think they'd show themselves if that were the case," Lucky said. "They can obviously
hide from us pretty well when they want to."
         "Anyhow," Cortez said, "if they're spies, the damage has been done. Don't think it'd be smart
to take any action against them. I know you'd all like to see 'em dead for what they did to Ho, so
would I, but we'd better be careful."
         I didn't want to see them dead, but I'd just as soon not have seen them in any condition. I was
walking backwards slowly, toward the middle of camp. The creature didn't seem disposed to follow.
Maybe he just knew we were surrounded. He was pulling up grass with his arm and munching.
         "OK, all of you platoon leaders, wake everybody up, get a roll count. Let me know if
anybody's been hurt. Tell your people we're moving out in one minute."
         I don't know what Cortez had expected, but of course the creatures followed right along. They
didn't keep us surrounded; just had twenty or thirty following us all the time. Not the same ones,
either. Individuals would saunter away, and new ones would join the parade. It was pretty obvious
that they weren't going to tire out.
         We were each allowed one stimtab. Without it, no one could have marched an hour. A second
pill would have been welcome after the edge started to wear off, but the mathematics of the situation
forbade it; we were still thirty klicks from the enemy base, fifteen hours' marching at the least. And
though you could stay awake and energetic for a hundred hours on the tabs, aberrations of judgment
and perception snowballed after the second one, until in extremis the most bizarre hallucinations
would be taken at face value, and a person could fidget for hours deciding whether to have breakfast.
         Under artificial stimulation, the company traveled with great energy for the first six hours,
was slowing by the seventh, and ground to an exhausted halt after rune hours and nineteen
kilometers. The teddy bears had never lost sight of us and, according to Lucky, had never stopped
"broadcasting." Cortez's decision was that we would stop for seven hours, each platoon taking one
hour of perimeter guard. I was never 50 glad to have been in the seventh platoon, as we stood guard
the last shift and thus were able to get six hours of uninterrupted sleep.
         In the few moments I lay awake after finally lying down, the thought came to me that the next
time I closed my eyes could well be the last And partly because of the drug hangover, mostly because
of the past day's horrors, I found that I really didn't give a shit.

14
       Our first contact with the Taurans came during my shift.
       The teddy bears were still there when I woke up and replaced Doc Jones on guard. They'd
gone back to their original formation, one in front of each guard position. The one who was waiting
for me seemed a little larger than normal, but otherwise looked just like all the others. All the grass
had been cropped where he was sitting, so he occasionally made forays to the left or right. But he
always returned to sit right in front of me, you would say staring if he had had anything to stare with.
       We had been facing each other for about fifteen minutes when Cortez's voice rumbled:
       "Awright everybody, wake up and get hid!"
       I followed instinct and flopped to the ground and rolled into a tall stand of grass.
       "Enemy vessel overhead." His voice was almost laconic.
       Strictly speaking, it wasn't really overhead, but rather passing somewhat east of us. It was
moving slowly, maybe a hundred klicks per hour, and looked like a broomstick surrounded by a dirty
soap bubble. The creature riding it was a little more human-looking than the teddy bears, but still no
prize. I cranked my image amplifier up to forty log two for a closer look.
         He had two arms and two legs, but his waist was so small you could encompass it with both
hands. Under the tiny waist was a large horseshoe-shaped pelvic structure nearly a meter wide, from
which dangled two long skinny legs with no apparent knee joint Above that waist his body swelled
out again, to a chest no smaller than the huge pelvis. His arms looked suprisingly human, except that
they were too long and undermuscled. There were too many fingers on his hands. Shoulderless,
neckless. His head was a nightmarish growth that swelled like a goiter from his massive chest. Two
eyes that looked like clusters of fish eggs, a bundle of tassles instead of a nose, and a rigidly open
hole that might have been a mouth sitting low down where his adam's apple should have been.
Evidently the soap bubble contained an amenable environment, as he was wearing absolutely nothing
except his ridged hide, that looked like skin submerged too long in hot water, then dyed a pale
orange. "He" had no external genitalia, but nothing that might hint of mammary glands. So we opted
for the male pronoun by default.
         Obviously, he either didn't see us or thought we were part of the herd of teddy bears. He never
looked back at us, but just continued in the same direction we were headed, .05 rad east of north.
"Might as well go back to sleep now, if you can sleep after looking at that thing. We move out at
0435." Forty minutes.
         Because of the planet's opaque cloud cover, there had been no way to tell, from space, what
the enemy base looked like or how big it was. We only knew its position, the same way we knew the
position the scoutships were supposed to land on. So it too could easily have been underwater, or
underground.
But some of the drones were reconnaissance ships as well as decoys: and in their mock attacks on the
base, one managed to get close enough to take a picture. Captain Stott beamed down a diagram of the
place to Cor-tez—the only one with a visor in his suit—when we were five klicks from the bases's
"radio" position. We stopped and he called all the platoon leaders in with the seventh platoon to
confer. Two teddy bears loped in, too. We tried to ignore them.
         "OK, the captain sent down some pictures of our objective. I'm going to draw a map; you
platoon leaders copy." They took pads and styli out of their leg pockets, while Cortez unrolled a large
plastic mat. He gave it a shake to randomize any residual charge, and turned on his stylus.
         "Now, we're coming from this direction." He put an arrow at the bottom of the sheet. "First
thing we'll hit is this row of huts, probably billets or bunkers, but who the hell knows. . . . Our initial
objective is to destroy these buildings—the whole base is on a flat plain; there's no way we could
really sneak by them,"
         "Potter here. Why can't we jump over them?" "Yeah, we could do that, and wind up
completely surrounded, cut to ribbons. We take the buildings.
         "After we do that ... all I can say is that well have to think on our feet. From the aerial
reconnaissance, we can figure out the function of only a couple of buildings—and that stinks. We
might wind up wasting a lot of time demolishing the equivalent of an enlisted-men's bar, ignoring a
huge logistic computer because it looks like ... a garbage dump or something.''
         "Mandella here," I said. "Isn't there a spaceport of some kind—seems to me we ought to ..."
         "I'll get to that, damn it There's a ring of these huts all around the camp, so we've got to break
through somewhere. This placeTl be closest, less chance of giving away our position before we
attack.
"There's nothing in the whole place that actually looks like a weapon. That doesn't mean anything,
though; you could hide a gigawatt laser in each of those huts.
         "Now, about five hundred meters from the huts, in the middle of the base, well come to this
big flower-shaped structure." Cortez drew a large symmetrical shape that looked like the outline of a
flower with seven petals. "What the hell this is, your guess is as good as mine. There's only one of
them, though, so we don't damage it any more than we have to. Which means ... we blast it to
splinters if I think it's dangerous.
         "Now, as far as your spaceport, Mandella, is concerned—there just isn't one. Nothing.
         "That cruiser the Hope caulked had probably been left in orbit, like ours has to be. If they
have any equivalent of a scoutship, or drone missiles, they're either not kept here or they're well
hidden."
         "Bohrs here. Then what did they attack with, while we were coming down from orbit?" "I
wish we knew, Private.
         "Obviously, we don't have any way of estimating their numbers, not directly. Recon pictures
failed to show a single Tauran on the grounds of the base. Meaning nothing, because it is an alien
environment. Indirectly, though ... we count the number of broomsticks, those flying things.
         "There are fifty-one huts, and each has at most one broomstick. Four don't have any parked
outside, but we located three at various other parts of the base. Maybe this indicates that there are
fifty-one Taurans, one of whom was outside the base when the picture was taken."
         "Keating here. Or fifty-one officers."
         "That's right—maybe fifty thousand infantrymen stacked in one of these buDdings. Now way
to tell. Maybe ten Taurans, each with five broomsticks, to use according to his mood.
         "We've got one thing in our favor, and that's communications. They evidently use a frequency
modulation of magahertz electromagnetic radiation."
         "Radio!"
         "That's right, whoever you are. Identify yourself when you speak. So it's quite possible that
they can't detect our phased-neutrino communications. Also, just prior to the attack, the Hope is
going to deliver a nice dirty fission bomb; detonate it in the upper atmosphere right over the base.
That'll restrict them to line-of-sight communications for some time; even those will be full of static."
         "Why don't . . . Tate here . . . why don't they just drop the bomb right in their laps. Save us a
lot of—"
         "That doesn't even deserve an answer, Private. But the answer is, they might. And you better
hope they don't. If they caulk the base, it'll be for the safety of the Hope. After we've attacked, and
probably before we're far enough away for it to make much difference.
         "We keep that from happening by doing a good job. We have to reduce the base to where it
can no longer function; at the same time, leave as much intact as possible. And take one prisoner."
         "Potter here. You mean, at least one prisoner."
         "I mean what I say. One only. Potter . . . you're relieved of your platoon. Send Chavez up."
         "All right, Sergeant." The relief in her voice was unmistakable.
         Cortez continued with his map and instructions. There was one other building whose function
was pretty obvious; it had a large steerable dish antenna on top. We were to destroy it as soon as the
grenadiers got in range.
         The attack plan was very loose. Our signal to begin would be the flash of the fission bomb. At
the same time, several drones would converge on the base, so we could see what their antispacecraft
defenses were. We would try to reduce the effectiveness of those defenses without destroying them
completely.
         Immediately after the bomb and the drones, the grenadiers would vaporize a line of seven
huts. Everybody would break through the hole into the base . . . and what would happen after that
was anybody's guess.
         Ideally, we'd sweep from that end of the base to the other, destroying certain targets, caulking
all but one Tauran. But that was unlikely to happen, as it depended onrthe Taurans' offering very little
resistance.
On the other hand, if the Taurans showed obvious superiority from the begining, Cortez would give
the order to scatter. Everybody had a different compass bearing for retreat—we'd blossom out in all
directions, the survivors to rendezvous in a valley some forty klicks east of the base. Then we'd see
about a return engagement, after the Hope softened the base up a bit.
        "One last thing," Cortez rasped. "Maybe some of you feel the way Potter evidently does,
maybe some of your men feel that way . . . that we ought to go easy, not make this so much of a
bloodbath. Mercy is a luxury, a weakness we can't afford to indulge in at this stage of the war. All we
know about the enemy is that they have killed seven hundred and ninety-eight humans. They haven't
shown any restraint in attacking our cruisers, and it'd be foolish to expect any this time, this first
ground action.
        "They are responsible for the lives of all of your comrades who died in training, and for Ho,
and for all the others who are surely going to die today. I can't understand anybody who wants to
spare them. But that doesn't make any difference. You have your orders and, what the hell, you might
as well know, all of you have a post-hvpnotic suggestion that I will trigger by a phrase, just before
the battle. It will make your job easier."
        "Sergeant ..."
        "Shut up. We're short on time; get back to your platoons and brief them. We move out in five
minutes."
        The platoon leaders returned to their men, leaving Cortez and ten of us —plus three teddy
bears, milling around, getting in the way.

15
         We took the last five klicks very carefully, sticking to the highest grass, running across
occasional clearings. When we were 500 meters from where the base was supposed to be, Cortez
took the third platoon forward to scout, while the rest of us laid low.
         Cortez's voice came over the general freak: "Looks pretty much like we expected. Advance in
a file, crawling. When you get to the third platoon, follow your squad leader to the left or right."
         We did that and wound up with a string of eighty-three people in a line roughly perpendicular
to the direction of attack. We were pretty well hidden, except for the dozen or so teddy bears that
mooched along the line, munching grass.
         There was no sign of life inside the base. All of the buildings were windowless and a uniform
shiny white. The huts that were our first objective were large featureless half-buried eggs some sixty
meters apart Cortez assigned one to each grenadier.
         We were broken into three fire teams: team A consisted of platoons two, four, and six; team
B was one, three, and five; the command platoon was team C.
         "Less than a minute now—filters down!—when I say 'fire,' grenadiers, take out your targets.
God help you if you miss."
         There was a sound like a giant's belch, and a stream of five or six iridescent bubbles floated
up from the flower-shaped building. They rose with increasing speed until they were almost out of
sight, then shot off to the south, over our heads. The ground was suddenly bright, and for the first
time in a long time, I saw my shadow, a long one pointed north. The bomb had gone off prematurely.
I just had time to think that it didn't make too much difference; it'd still make alphabet soup out of
their communications—
         "Drones!" A ship came screaming in just about tree level, and a bubble was in the air to meet
it. When they contacted, the bubble popped and the drone exploded into a million tiny fragments.
Another one came from the opposite side and suffered the same fate.
         "FIRE!" Seven bright glares of 500-microton grenades and a sustained concussion that surely
would have killed an unprotected man.
         "Filters up." Gray haze of smoke and dust. Clods of dirt falling with a sound like heavy
raindrops.
         "Listen up:

               'Scots, who hae wi' Wallace bled;
               Scots, wham Bruce has aften led,
               Welcome to your gory bed,
               Or to victory!'"

        I hardly heard him for trying to keep track of what was going on in my skull. I knew it was
just post-hypnotic suggestion, even remembered the session in Missouri when they'd implanted it, but
that didn't make it any less compelling. My mind reeled under the strong pseudo-memories: shaggy
hulks that were Taurans (not at all what we now knew they looked like) boarding a colonists' vessel,
eating babies while mothers watched in screaming terror (the colonists never took babies; they
wouldn't stand the acceleration), then raping the women to death with huge veined purple members
(ridiculous that they would feel desire for humans), holding the men down while they plucked flesh
from their living bodies and gobbled it (as if they could assimilate the alien protein) ... a hundred
grisly details as sharply remembered as the events of a minute ago, ridiculously overdone and
logically absurd. But while my conscious mind was rejecting the silliness, somewhere much deeper,
down in that sleeping animal where we keep our real motives and morals, something was thirsting for
alien blood, secure in the conviction that the noblest thing a man could do would be to die killing one
of those horrible monsters. . . .
        I knew it was all purest soyashit, and I hated the men who had taken such obscene liberties
with my mind, but I could even hear my teeth grinding, feel my cheeks frozen in a spastic grin,
blood-lust ... A teddy bear walked in front of me, looking dazed. I started to raise my laser-finger, but
somebody beat me to it and the creature's head exploded in a cloud of gray splinters and blood.
        Lucky groaned, half-whining, "Dirty . . . filthy fuck-en bastards." Lasers flared and
crisscrossed, and all of the teddy bears fell dead.
        "Watch it, goddamnit," Cortez screamed. "Aim those fuckin things—they aren't toys!
        "Team A, move out—into the craters to cover B."
        Somebody was laughing and sobbing. "What the fuck is wrong with you, Petrov?" Strange to
hear Cortez cussing.
        I twisted around and saw Petrov, behind and to my left, lying in a shallow hole, digging
frantically with both hands, crying and gurgling.
        "Fuck," Cortez said. "Team B! Ten meters past the craters, get down in a line. Team C—into
the craters with A."
        I scrambled up and covered the hundred meters in twelve amplified strides. The craters were
practically large enough to hide a scoutship, some ten meters in diameter. I jumped to the opposite
side of the hole and landed next to a fellow named Chin. He didn't even look around when I landed,
just kept scanning the base for signs of life.
        "Team A —ten meters, past team B, down in line." Just as he finished, the building in front of
us burped, and a salvo of the bubbles fanned out toward our lines. Most people saw it coming and got
down, but Chin was just getting up to make his rush and stepped right into one.
        It grazed the top of his helmet and disappeared with a faint pop. He took one step backwards
and toppled over the edge of the crater, trailing an arc of blood and brains. Lifeless, spreadeagled, he
slid halfway to the bottom, shoveling dirt into the perfectly symmetrical hole where the bubble had
chewed indiscriminately through plastic, hair, skin, bone and brain.
        "Everybody hold it. Platoon leaders, casualty report . . . check . . . check, check . . . check,
check, check . . . check. We have three deaders. Wouldn't be any if you'd have kept low. So
everybody grab dirt when you hear that thing go off. Team A, complete the rush."
        They completed the maneuver without incident. "OK. Team C, rush to where B . . . hold it!
Down!"
        Everybody was already hugging the ground. The bubbles slid by in a smooth arc about two
meters off the ground. They went serenely over our heads and, except for one that made toothpicks
out of a tree, disappeared in the distance.
         "B, rush past A ten meters. C, take over B's place. You B grenadiers, see if you can reach the
Flower."         Two grenades tore up the ground thirty or forty meters from the structure. In a good
imitation of panic, it started belching out a continuous stream of bubbles— still, none coming lower
than two meters off the ground. We kept hunched down and continued to advance.
         Suddenly, a seam appeared in the building and widened to the size of a large door. Taurans
came swarming out.
         "Grenadiers, hold your fire. B team, laser fire to the left and right—keep'm bunched up. A and
C, rush down the center."
         One Tauran died trying to run through a laser beam. The others stayed where they were.
         In a suit, it's pretty awkward to run and keep your head down at the same time. You have to
go from side to side, like a skater getting started; otherwise you'll be airborne. At least one person,
somebody in A team, bounced too high and suffered the same fate as Chin.
         I was feeling pretty fenced-in and trapped, with a wall of laser fire on each side and a low
ceiling that meant death to touch. But in spite of myself, I felt happy, euphoric, finally getting the
chance to kill some of those villainous baby-eaters. Knowing it was soyashit.
         They weren't fighting back, except for the rather ineffective bubbles (obviously not designed
as an anti-personnel weapon), and they didn't retreat back into the building, either. They milled
around, about a hundred of them, and watched us get closer. A couple of grenades would caulk them
all, but I guess Cortez was thinking about the prisoner.
         "OK, when I say 'go,' we're going to flank 'em. B team will hold fire. . . . Second and fourth
platoons to the right, sixth and seventh to the left. B team will move forward in line to box them in.
         "Go!" We peeled off to the left. As soon as the lasers stopped, the Taurans bolted, running in
a group on a collision course with our flank.
         "A team, down and fire! Don't shoot until you're sure of your aim—if you miss you might hit
a friendly. And fer Chris' sake save me one!"
         It was a horrifying sight, that herd of monsters bearing down on us. They were running in
great leaps —the bubbles avoiding them—- and they all looked like the one we saw earlier, riding the
broomstick; naked except for an almost transparent sphere around their whole bodies, that moved
along with them. The right flank started firing, picking off individuals in the rear of the pack.
         Suddenly a laser flared through the Taurans from the other side, somebody missing his mark.
There was a horrible scream, and I looked down the line to see someone —I think it was Perry—
writhing on the ground, right hand over the smoldering stump of his left arm, seared off just below
the elbow. Blood sprayed through his fingers, and the suit, its camouflage circuits scrambled,
flickered black-white-jungle-desert-green-gray. I don't know how long I stared —long enough for the
medic to run over and start giving aid— but when I looked up the Taurans were almost on top of me.
         My first shot was wild and high, but it grazed the top of the leading Tauran's protective
bubble. The bubble disappeared and the monster stumbled and fell to the ground, jerking
spasmodically. Foam gushed out of his mouth-hole, first white, then streaked red. With one last jerk
he became rigid and twisted backwards, almost to the shape of a horseshoe. His long scream, a high-
pitched whistle, stopped just as his comrades trampled over him. I hated myself for smiling.
         It was slaughter, even though our flank was outnumbered five to one. They kept coming
without faltering, even when they had to climb over the drift of bodies and parts of bodies that piled
up high, parallel to our flank. The ground between us was slick red with Tauran blood —all God's
children got hemoglobin—and like the teddy bears, their guts looked pretty much like guts to my
untrained eye. My helmet reverberated with hysterical laughter while we slashed them to gory
chunks, and I almost didn't hear Cortez:
         "Hold your fire—I said HOLD IT, goddammit! Catch a couple of the bastards, they won't hurt
you." I stopped shooting and eventually so did everybody else. When the next Tauran jumped over
the smoking pile of meat in front of me, I dove to try to tackle him around those spindly legs.
         It was like hugging a big, slippery balloon. When I tried to drag him down, he popped out of
my arms and kept running.
        We managed to stop one of them by the simple expedient of piling half-a-dozen people on top
of him. By that time the others had run through our line and were headed for the row of large
cylindrical tanks that Cortez had said were probably for storage. A little door had opened in the base
of each one.
        "We've got our prisoner," Cortez shouted. "Kill!" They were fifty meters away and running
hard, difficult targets. Lasers slashed around them, bobbing high and low. One fell, sliced in two, but
the others, about ten of them, kept going and were almost to the doors when the grenadiers started
firing.
        They were Still loaded with 500-mike bombs, but a near miss wasn't enough—the concussion
would just send them flying, unhurt in their bubbles.
        "The buildings! Get the fucken buildings!" The grenadiers raised their aim and let fly, but the
bombs only seemed to scorch the white outside of the structures until, by chance, one landed in a
door. That split the building just as if it had a seam; the two halves popped away and a cloud of
machinery flew into the air, accompanied by a huge pale flame that rolled up and disappeared in an
instant. Then the others all concentrated on the doors, except for potshots at some of the Taurans, not
so much to get them as to blow them away before they could get inside. They seemed awfully eager.
        All this time, we were trying to get the Taurans with laser fire, while they weaved and
bounced around trying to get into the structures. We moved in as close to them as we could without
putting ourselves in danger from the grenade blasts, yet too far away for good aim.
        Still, we were getting them one by one and managed to destroy four of the seven buildings.
Then, when there were only two aliens left, a nearby grenade blast flung one of them to within a few
meters of a door. He dove in and several grenadiers fired salvos after him, but they all fell short or
detonated harmlessly on the side. Bombs were falling all around, making an awful racket, but the
sound was suddenly drowned out by a great sigh, like a giant's intake of breath, and where the
building had been was a thick cylindrical cloud of smoke, solid-looking, dwindling away into the
stratosphere, straight as if laid down by a ruler. The other Tauran had been right at the base of the
cylinder; I could see pieces of him flying. A second later, a shock wave hit us and I rolled helplessly,
pinwheeling, to smash into the pile of Tauran bodies and roll beyond.
        I picked myself up and panicked for a second when I saw there was blood all over my suit —
when I realized it was only alien blood, I relaxed but felt unclean.
        "Catch the bastard! Catch him!" In the confusion, the Tauran had gotten free and was running
for the grass. One platoon was chasing after him, losing ground, but then all of B team ran over and
cut him off. I jogged over to join in the fun.
        There were four people on top of him, and a ring around them of about fifty people, watching
the struggle.
        "Spread out, damnit! There might be a thousand more of them waiting to get us in one place."
We dispersed, grumbling. By unspoken agreement we were all sure that there were no more live
Taurans on the face of the planet.
        Cortez was walking toward the prisoner while I backed away. Suddenly the four men
collapsed in a pile on top of the creature. . . . Even from my distance I could see the foam spouting
from his mouth-hole. His bubble had popped. Suicide.
        "Damn!" Cortez was right there. "Get off that bastard." The four men got off and Cortez used
his laser to slice the monster into a dozen quivering chunks. Heartwarming sight.
        "That's all right, though, well find another one—everybody! Back in the arrowhead formation.
Combat assault, on the Flower."
        Well, we assaulted the Flower, which had evidently run out of ammunition (it was still
belching, but no bubbles), and it was empty. We scurried up ramps and through corridors, fingers at
the ready, like kids playing soldier. There was nobody home.
        The same lack of response at the antenna installation, the "Salami," and twenty other major
buildings, as well as the forty-four perimeter huts still intact. So we had "captured" dozens of
buildings, mostly of incomprehensible purpose, but failed in our main mission, capturing a Tauran
for the xenologists to experiment with. Oh well, they could have all the bits and pieces they'd ever
want. That was something.
        After we'd combed every last square centimeter of the base, a scoutship came in with the real
exploration crew, the scientists. Cortez said, "All right, snap out of it," and the hypnotic compulsion
fell away.
        At first it was pretty grim. A lot of the people, like Lucky and Marygay, almost went crazy
with the memories of bloody murder multiplied a hundred times. Cortez ordered everybody to take a
sed-tab, two for the ones most upset. I took two without being specifically ordered to do so.
        Because it was murder, unadorned butchery—once we had the anti-spacecraft weapon doped
out, we hadn't been in any danger. The Taurans hadn't seemed to have any conception of person-to-
person fighting. We had just herded them up and slaughtered them, the first encounter between
mankind and another intelligent species. Maybe it was the second encounter, counting the teddy
bears. What might have happened if we had sat down and tried to communicate? But they got the
same treatment
        I spent a long time after that telling myself over and over that it hadn't been me who so
gleefully carved up those frightened, stampeding creatures. Back in the twentieth century, they had
established to everybody's satisfaction that "I was just following orders" was an in-adeqaute excuse
for inhuman conduct ... but what can you do when the orders come from deep down in that puppet
master of the unconscious?
        Worst of all was the feeling that perhaps my actions weren't all that inhuman. Ancestors only
a few generations back would have done the same thing, even to their fellow men, without any
hypnotic conditioning.
I was disgusted with the human race, disgusted with the army and horrified at the prospect of living
with myself for another century or so.... Well, there was always brainwipe.
        A ship with a lone Tauran survivor had escaped and had gotten away clean, the bulk of the
planet shielding it from Earth's Hope while it dropped into Aleph's collapsar field. Escaped home, I
guessed, wherever that was, to report what twenty men with hand-weapons could do to a hundred
fleeing on foot, unarmed.
I suspected that the next time humans met Taurans in ground combat, we would be more evenly
matched. And I was right .


Sergeant Mandella
2007-2024 A.D.

1
        Scared? Oh yes, I was scared—and who wouldn't be? Only a fool or a suicide or a robot. Or a
line officer.
        Submajor Stott paced back and forth behind the small podium in the assembly room-chop-
hall-gymnasium of the Anniversary. We'd made our final collapsar jump, from Tet-38 to Yod-4. We
were decelerating at 1 1/2 gravities, and our velocity relative to that collapsar was a respectable .90c.
We were being chased.
        "I wish you people would relax for a while and trust the ship's computer. The Tauran vessel at
any rate will not be within strike range for another two weeks, and if you keep moping around for
two weeks neither you nor your men will be in any condition to fight when the time comes. Fear is a
contagious disease. Mandella!"
        He was always careful to call me "Sergeant" Mandella in front of the company. But
everybody at this briefing was a squad leader or more; not a private in the bunch. So he dropped the
honorifics. "Yes, sir."
         "Mandella, you are responsible for the psychological as well as the physical efficiency of the
men and women in your squad. Assuming that you are aware of the morale problem building aboard
this vessel, and assuming that your squad is not immune. . . what have you done about it?"
         "As far as my squad is concerned, sir?"
         He looked at me for a long moment "Of course."
         "We talk it out, sir."
         "And have you arrived at any dramatic conclusion?"
         "Meaning no disrespect, sir, I think the major problem is obvious. My people have been
cooped up in this ship, hell, everybody has, for fourteen—"
         "Ridiculous. Every one of us has been adequately conditioned against the pressures of living
in close quarters, and the enlisted men have the privilege of confraternity." That was a delicate way
of putting it "Officers must remain celibate and yet we have no morale problem."
         If he thought his officers were celibate, he should have sat down and had a long talk with
Lieutenant Harmony. Maybe he just meant line officers, though, Cortez and himself. Fifty percent
right, probably. Cortez was rather friendly with Corporal Kamehameha.
         "The therapists reinforced your conditioning in this regard," he continued, "while they were
working to erase the hate-conditioning—everybody knows how / feel about that—and they may be
misguided but they are skilled."
         "Corporal Potter." He called her by rank to remind everybody why she hadn't been promoted
along with the rest of us. Too soft "Have you 'talked it out' with your people, too?"
         "We've discussed it. Sir,"
         The submajor could "glare mildly" at people. He glared mildly at Marygay until she
continued.
         "I don't think Sergeant Mandella was finding fault with the condi—"
         "Sergeant Mandella can speak for himself. I want your opinion. Your observations." He said
it in a way that indicated he didn't want them much.
         "Well, I don't think it's the fault of the conditioning either, sir. We don't have any trouble
living together. Everybody is just impatient, tired of doing the same thing week after week."
         "They're anxious for combat, then?" No sarcasm in his voice.
         "They want to get off the ship, sir, out of the routine."
         "They will get off the ship," he said, allowing himself a small mechanical smile. "And then
they'll probably be just as impatient to get back on."
         It went back and forth like that for a long time. Nobody wanted to put words to the basic fact
that our men and women had had over a year to brood on the upcoming battle; they could only
become more and more apprehensive. And now a Tauran cruiser closing on us— we'd have to take
our chances with it before we were within a month of the ground assault.
         The prospect of hitting the portal planet and playing soldier was bad enough. But at least you
have a chance, fighting on the ground, to influence your own fate. This bullshit of sitting in a pod,
part of the target, while the Anniversary played mathematical games with the Taur-an ship ... To be
alive one nanosecond and dead the next because of an error in somebody's thirtieth decimal place,
thafs what was giving me trouble. But try to tell that to Stott. I'd finally had to admit to myself that he
wasn't putting on a grisly little act. He actually couldn't understand the difference between fear and
cowardice. Whether he'd been purposefully conditioned into that viewpoint —which I doubted— or
was just plain crazy, it no longer mattered.
         He was raking Ching over the coals, the same old song and dance. I fingered the fresh T/O
they had given us.

________________________________________________________________________
TABLE OF ORGANIZATION:
Strike Force Alpha Yod-4 Campaign
First Platoon
COMMANDING:              SMStott        CMD Martinez
2ECHN: 1LT Cortez
3ECHN: FFSGT (vac)
FIELD MEDIC: 2LT Wilson MD
4ECHN: 2LT (vac)
5ECHN: PSgt Rogers
6ECHN:
        Sgt Mandella         Sgt Ching           Cpl Potter
        CplTate       CplPetrov     Cpl Struve
        Cpl Yukawa           PvtLuthuli          Pvt Kurosawa
        PvtHofstadter PvtHerz       Pvt Alexandrov
        PvtMulroy            Pvt HeyrovksyPvt Bergman
        Pvt Shockley Pvt Katawba Pvt Demy
        PvtRabi       Pvt Pauling Pvt Stiller
                             Pvt Renault
SPECIALISTS: ILTs Bok (CK), Levine (CPR), Pastori (PSY), Winebrenner (MED); 2LTs Harmony
(MED), Princewell (DAT); 3LTs Stonewell (ARM), Theodopolis (RAD); Esg Singhe (NAV); PSgts
Dalton (MAIN), Namgyal (SUP).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ISSUED STARGATE TACBD/1003-9674-1300/20 Mar 2007 SG:

BY AUTH STFCOM Commander

DIST.         PRIM: All Personnel 1 PLT/STFALPHA
         SEC:  All Personnel STFALPHA 6ECHN and above
         TRT:  Personnel STFCOM 5ECHN and above NTK basis

                  By and for 4GEN Mubutu Ngako COMM

                  FOR THE COMMANDER
                  Arlathea Lincoln BGEN STFCOM
                  20 Mar 2007 SG

TACBD/1003/9674/1300/100 cop
________________________________________________________________________


       I knew most of the people from the Aleph massacre. The only new ones in my platoon were
Demy, Luthuli and Heyrovsky. In the company (excuse me, the "strike force") as a whole, we had
twenty replacements for the nineteen people we'd lost during the Aleph raid. One amputation, four
deaders and fourteen psychotics, casualties of overzealous hate-conditioning.
       I couldn't get over the "20 Mar 2007" at the bottom of the T/O. I'd been in the army ten years,
though it felt like less than two. Time dilation, of course. Even with the collapsar jumps, traveling
from star to star eats up the calendar.
       After this raid, I would probably be eligible for retirement with full pay—if I lived through
the raid, and if they didn't change the rules on us. A twenty-year veteran, and only twenty-five years
old.
         Stott was summing up when there was a knock on the door, a single loud rap. "Enter," he
said.
         An ensign I vaguely knew walked in casually and handed Stott a slip of paper without saying
a word. He stood there while Stott read it, slumping with just the right degree of insolence.
Technically, Stott was out of his chain of command; everybody in the Navy disliked him anyhow.
         Stott handed the paper back to the ensign and looked through him.
         "You will alert your squads that preliminary evasive maneuvers will commence at 2010, fifty-
eight minutes from now." He hadn't looked at his watch. "All personnel will be in acceleration shells
by 2000. Tench . . . hut!"
         We rose and, without enthusiasm, chorused, "Fuck you, sir." Idiotic.
         Stott strode out of the room and the ensign followed, smirking.
         I turned my ring to position 4, my assistant squad leader's channel, and talked into it: "Tate,
this is Man-
della." Everyone else in the room was doing the same.
         A tinny voice came out of the ring. "Tate here. What's up?"
         "Get ahold of the men and tell them we have to be in the shell by 2000. Evasive maneuvers."
         "Shit. They told us it'd be days."
         "I guess something new came up. Maybe the Commodore has a bright idea."
         "The Commodore can stuff it. You up in the lounge?"
         "Yeah."
         "Bring me back a cup when you come, OK? Little bit of sugar?"
         "OK. Be down in about half an hour."
         "Thanks. I'll start rounding 'em up." There was a general movement toward the soya machine.
I got in line behind Corporal Potter.
         "What do you think, Marygay?"
         "I'm just a corporal, Sarge. I'm not paid to— "
         "Sure, sure. Seriously."
         "Well, it doesn't have to be very complicated. Maybe the Commodore just wants us to try out
the shells again."
         "Once more before the real thing."
         "Mm-hm. Maybe." She picked up a cup and blew into it She looked worried, a tiny line
bisecting the space between her eyebrows. "Or maybe the Taurans had a ship 'way out, waiting for us.
I've wondered why they don't do it like we do at Stargate."
         I shrugged. "Stargate's a different thing. It takes seven or eight cruisers, moving all the time,
to cover the most probable exit angles. We can't afford to cover more than one collapsar, and neither
can they."
         "I don't know." She didn't say anything while she filled her cup. "Maybe we've stumbled on
their version of Stargate. Or maybe they have ten times as many ships. A hundred times. Who
knows?"
         I filled and sugared two cups, sealed one. "No way to tell." We walked back to a table, careful
with the rapid sloshing of the soya in the high gravity.
         "Maybe Singhe knows something," she said.
         "Maybe he does. But I'd have to get to him through Rogers and Cortez. Cortez would jump
down my throat if I tried to bother him now."
         "Oh, I can get to Singhe directly. We . . ." She looked at me very seriously and dimpled a little
bit. "We've been friends."
         I sipped some scalding soya and tried to sound nonchalant. "That's where you disappeared to
Wednesday night?"
        "I'd have to check my roster," she said and smiled. "I think it's Mondays, Wednesdays and
Fridays during months with an r in them. Why? You disapprove?"
        "Well . . . damn it, no, of course not. But—but he's an officer! A Navy officer!"
        "He's attached to us, and that makes him part army." She twisted her ring and said
"Directory." To me: "What about you and cuddly little Miss Harmony?"
        "That's not the same thing." -She was whispering a directory code into the ring.
        "Yes, it is. You just wanted to do it with an officer. Pervert." The ring bleated twice. Busy.
"How was she?"
        "Adequate." I was recovering.
        "Besides, Ensign Singhe is a perfect gentleman. And not the least bit jealous."
        "Neither am I," I said. "If he ever hurts you, tell me and I'll break his ass."
        She smiled at me across her cup. "If Lieutenant Harmony ever hurts you, tell me and I'll break
her ass."
        "It's a deal." We shook on it solemnly.

2
         The acceleration shells were something new, installed while we rested and resupplied at
Stargate. They enable us to use the ship at closer to its theoretical efficiency, the tachyon drive
boosting it to over twenty-five gravities' acceleration.
         Tate was waiting for me in the shell area. The rest of the squad was milling around talking. I
gave him his soya.
         "Thanks. Find out anything?"
         "Afraid not. Except that the swabbies don't seem to be scared, and it's their show. Probably
just another practice run."
         He slurped some soya. "What the hell. It's all the same to us, anyhow. Sit there and get
squeezed half to death. God, I hate those things."
         "Oh, I don't know. They might make the infantry obsolete. Then we can all go home."
         "Sure thing." The medic came by and gave me my shot.
         I waited until 1950 and hollered to the squad: "Let's go. Strip down and zip up."
         The shell is like a flexible space suit; at least the fittings on the inside are pretty similar. But
instead of a life support package, there's a hose going into the top of the helmet and two coming out
of the heels, as well as two relief tubes per suit. They're crammed in shoulder-to-shoulder on light
acceleration couches; getting to your shell is like picking your way through a giant plate of olive-drab
spaghetti.
         When the lights in my helmet showed that everybody was suited up, I pushed the button that
flooded the room. No way to see, of course, but I could imagine the pale blue solution—ethylene
glycol and something else—foaming up, around and over us. The suit material, cool and dry,
collapsed in to touch my skin at every point. I knew that my internal body pressure was increasing
rapidly to match the increasing fluid pressure "outside. That's what the shot was for: keep your cells
from getting squished between the devil and the pale blue sea. You could still feel it, though. By the
time my meter read 2 (external pressure equivalent to a column of water two nautical miles deep), I
felt that I was at the same time being crushed and bloated. By 2005 it was at 2.7 and holding steady.
When the maneuvers began at 2010, I couldn't feel the difference. I thought I saw the needle fluctuate
a tiny bit, though, and wondered how much acceleration it took to make that barely visible wobble.
         The major drawback of the system is that, of course, anybody caught outside of his shell when
the Anniversary hits twenty-five gees would be just so much strawberry jam. So the guiding and the
fighting have to be done by the ship's tactical computer—which does most of it anyway, but it's nice
to have a human overseer.
Another small problem is that if the ship gets damaged and the pressure drops, you'll explode like a