Private Mandella
1
‘Tonight  we’re  going  to  show  you  eight  silent  ways  to  kill  a  man.’  The
guy  who  said  that  was a  sergeant  who  didn’t  look  ﬁve  years  older  than
me.   So  if  he’d  ever  killed  a  man  in  combat,  silently  or  otherwise,   he’d
done it as an infant.
I   already  knew  eighty  ways   to  kill   people,   but   most   of   them  were
pretty  noisy. I sat up straight in my chair and assumed a look of polite
attention and fell asleep with my eyes open. So did most everybody else.
We’d  learned  that  they  never  scheduled  anything  important  for  these
after-chop classes.
The projector woke me up and I sat through a short tape showing the
‘eight silent ways.’ Some of the actors must have been brainwipes, since
they were actually killed.
After  the  tape  a  girl   in  the  front  row  raised  her  hand.   The  sergeant
nodded at her and she rose to parade rest. Not bad looking, but kind of
chunky  about   the  neck  and  shoulders.   Everybody  gets   that   way  after
carrying a heavy pack around for a couple of months.
‘Sir’ – we had to call sergeants ‘sir’ until graduation – ‘most of those
methods, really, they looked  .   .   . kind of silly.’
‘For instance?’
‘Like  killing  a  man  with  a  blow  to  the  kidneys,  from  an  entrenching
tool.   I  mean,   when  would  you  actually  have  only  an  entrenching  tool,
and no gun or knife? And why not just bash him over the head with it?’
‘He might have a helmet on,’ he said reasonably.
‘Besides, Taurans probably don’t even have kidneys!’
He  shrugged.  ‘Probably  they  don’t.’  This  was  1997,  and  nobody  had
ever seen a Tauran; hadn’t even found any pieces of Taurans bigger than
a  scorched  chromosome.   ‘But  their  body  chemistry  is  similar  to  ours,
and  we  have  to  assume  they’re  similarly  complex  creatures.  They  must
have weaknesses, vulnerable spots. You have to ﬁnd out where they are.
‘That’s the important thing.’ He stabbed a ﬁnger at the screen. ‘Those
eight  convicts  got  caulked  for  your  beneﬁt  because  you’ve  got  to  ﬁnd
out   how  to  kill   Taurans,   and  be   able   to  do  it   whether   you  have   a
megawatt laser or an emery board.’
She sat back down, not looking too convinced.
‘Any more questions?’ Nobody raised a hand.
‘OK.  Tench-hut!’  We  staggered  upright  and  he  looked  at  us  expect-
antly.
‘Fuck you, sir,’ came the familiar tired chorus.
‘Louder!’
‘FUCK  YOU,  SIR!’ One of the army’s less-inspired morale devices.
‘That’s better. Don’t forget, pre-dawn maneuvers tomorrow. Chop at
0330, ﬁrst formation, 0400. Anybody sacked after 0340 owes one stripe.
Dismissed.’
I zipped up my coverall and went across the snow to the lounge for a
cup  of   soya  and  a  joint.   I’d  always  been  able  to  get   by  on  ﬁve  or  six
hours  of  sleep,  and  this  was  the  only  time  I  could  be  by  myself,  out  of
the army for a while. Looked at the newsfax for a few minutes. Another
ship got caulked, out by Aldebaran sector. That was four years ago. They
were mounting a reprisal ﬂeet, but it’ll take four years more for them to
get   out   there.   By  then,   the   Taurans   would  have   every   portal   planet
sewed up tight.
Back at the billet, everybody else was sacked and the main lights were
out.  The  whole  company’d  been  dragging  ever  since  we  got  back  from
the   two-week   Lunar   training.   I   dumped   my   clothes   in   the   locker,
checked  the  roster  and  found  out  I  was  in  bunk  31.  Goddammit,  right
under the heater.
I slipped through the curtain as quietly as possible so as not to wake
up the person next to me. Couldn’t see who it was, but I couldn’t have
cared less. I slipped under the blanket.
‘You’re late, Mandella,’ a voice yawned. It was Rogers.
‘Sorry I woke you up,’ I whispered.
‘ ’Sallright.’   She  snuggled  over   and  clasped  me  spoon-fashion.   She
was warm and reasonably soft.
I   patted  her   hip  in  what   I   hoped  was   a  brotherly  fashion.   ‘Night,
Rogers.’
‘G’night, Stallion.’ She returned the gesture more pointedly.
Why  do  you  always   get   the  tired  ones   when  you’re  ready  and  the
randy ones when you’re tired? I bowed to the inevitable.
Peace  and  War
8
2
‘Awright, let’s get some goddamn back inta that! Stringer team! Move it
up – move your ass up!’
A warm front had come in about midnight and the snow had turned
to sleet. The permaplast stringer weighed ﬁve hundred pounds and was
a bitch to handle, even when it wasn’t covered with ice. There were four
of us, two at each end, carrying the plastic girder with frozen ﬁngertips.
Rogers was my partner.
‘Steel!’   the   guy  behind  me   yelled,   meaning  that   he   was   losing  his
hold.   It   wasn’t   steel,   but   it   was   heavy   enough  to   break   your   foot.
Everybody  let  go  and  hopped  away.  It splashed  slush  and mud all  over
us.
‘Goddammit, Petrov,’ Rogers said, ‘why didn’t you go out for the Red
Cross or something? This fucken thing’s not that fucken heavy.’ Most of
the  girls  were  a  little  more  circumspect   in  their  speech.   Rogers  was  a
little butch.
‘Awright,   get   a  fucken  move   on,   stringers   –  epoxy  team!   Dog’em!
Dog’em!’
Our   two  epoxy   people   ran  up,   swinging   their   buckets.   ‘Let’s   go,
Mandella. I’m freezin’ my balls off.’
‘Me, too,’ the girl said with more feeling than logic.
‘One – two – heave!’ We got the thing up again and staggered toward
the   bridge.   It   was   about   three-quarters   completed.   Looked  as   if   the
second  platoon  was  going  to  beat  us.   I  wouldn’t  give  a  damn,   but  the
platoon  that  got  their  bridge  built  ﬁrst  got  to  ﬂy  home.   Four  miles  of
muck for the rest of us, and no rest before chop.
We  got  the  stringer  in  place,  dropped  it  with  a  clank,  and  ﬁtted  the
static clamps that held it to the rise-beams. The female half of the epoxy
team  started  slopping  glue  on  it   before  we  even  had  it   secured.   Her
partner  was  waiting  for  the  stringer  on  the  other  side.   The  ﬂoor  team
was  waiting  at  the  foot  of  the  bridge,   each  one  holding  a  piece  of  the
light, stressed permaplast over his head like an umbrella. They were dry
and  clean.   I   wondered  aloud  what   they  had  done  to  deserve  it,   and
Rogers suggested a couple of colorful, but unlikely, possibilities.
We were going back to stand by the next stringer when the ﬁeld ﬁrst
(name of Dougelstein, but we called him ‘Awright’) blew a whistle and
bellowed,   ‘Awright,   soldier   boys   and  girls,   ten  minutes.   Smoke’em  if
you got ’em.’ He reached into his pocket and turned on the control that
heated our coveralls.
Rogers and I sat down on our end of the stringer and I took out my
weed box. I had lots of joints,  but we were ordered not to smoke them
until after night-chop. The only tobacco I had was a cigarro butt about
three  inches  long.  I  lit  it  on  the  side  of  the  box;  it  wasn’t  too  bad  after
the ﬁrst couple of puffs. Rogers took a puff, just to be sociable, but made
a face and gave it back.
‘Were you in school when you got drafted?’ she asked.
‘Yeah.   Just   got   a   degree   in   physics.   Was   going   after   a   teacher’s
certiﬁcate.’
She nodded soberly. ‘I was in biology  .   .   .’
‘Figures.’ I ducked a handful of slush. ‘How far?’
‘Six   years,   bachelor’s   and  technical.’   She   slid  her   boot   along   the
ground, turning up a ridge of mud and slush the consistency of freezing
ice milk. ‘Why the fuck did this have to happen?’
I shrugged. It didn’t call for an answer, least of all the answer that the
UNEF  kept giving us. Intellectual and physical elite of the planet, going
out  to  guard  humanity  against  the  Tauran  menace.  Soyashit.  It  was  all
just   a  big  experiment.   See   whether   we   could  goad  the   Taurans   into
ground action.
Awright  blew  the  whistle  two  minutes  early,  as expected, but  Rogers
and I and the other two stringers got to sit for a minute while the epoxy
and  ﬂoor  teams  ﬁnished  covering  our  stringer.   It  got  cold  fast,   sitting
there with our suits turned off, but we remained inactive on principle.
There  really  wasn’t  any  sense  in  having  us  train  in  the  cold.   Typical
army  half-logic.   Sure,   it   was   going  to  be  cold  where  we  were  going,
but   not   ice-cold  or   snow-cold.   Almost   by  deﬁnition,   a  portal   planet
remained  within  a  degree  or  two  of  absolute  zero  all   the  time  –  since
collapsars don’t shine – and the ﬁrst chill you felt would mean that you
were a dead man.
Twelve years before, when I was ten years old, they had discovered the
collapsar  jump.  Just  ﬂing  an  object  at  a  collapsar  with  sufﬁcient  speed,
and  out  it  pops  in  some  other  part  of  the  galaxy.  It  didn’t  take  long  to
Peace  and  War
10
ﬁgure out the formula that predicted where it would come out: it travels
along  the  same  ‘line’   (actually  an  Einsteinian  geodesic)  it  would  have
followed  if   the   collapsar   hadn’t   been  in  the   way   –  until   it   reaches
another collapsar ﬁeld, whereupon it reappears, repelled with the same
speed at which it approached the original collapsar. Travel time between
the two collapsars  .   .   . exactly zero.
It   made   a   lot   of   work   for   mathematical   physicists,   who   had   to
redeﬁne   simultaneity,   then  tear   down  general   relativity   and  build  it
back  up  again.   And  it   made  the  politicians  very  happy,   because  now
they  could  send  a  shipload  of   colonists  to  Fomalhaut   for  less  than  it
had  once  cost  to  put  a  brace  of  men on  the  Moon.  There  were  a  lot  of
people the politicians would love to see on Fomalhaut, implementing a
glorious adventure rather than stirring up trouble at home.
The   ships   were   always   accompanied  by   an  automated  probe   that
followed  a  couple  of  million  miles  behind.   We  knew  about  the  portal
planets,   little   bits   of   ﬂotsam  that   whirled  around  the   collapsars;   the
purpose  of  the  drone  was  to  come  back  and  tell  us  in  the  event  that  a
ship had smacked into a portal planet at .999 of the speed of light.
That   particular   catastrophe   never   happened,   but   one   day  a  drone
limped  back  alone.   Its  data  were  analyzed,   and  it  turned  out  that  the
colonists’   ship   had   been   pursued   by   another   vessel   and   destroyed.
This  happened  near  Aldebaran,   in  the  constellation  Taurus,   but  since
‘Aldebaraniam’   is   a   little   hard   to   handle,   they   named   the   enemy
‘Tauran.’
Colonizing   vessels   thenceforth   went   out   protected   by   an   armed
guard.   Often  the   armed  guard  went   out   alone,   and  ﬁnally   the   Col-
onization  Group  got  shortened  to  UNEF,  United  Nations  Exploratory
Force. Emphasis on the ‘force.’
Then some bright lad in the General Assembly decided that we ought
to ﬁeld an army of footsoldiers to guard the portal planets of the nearer
collapsars.  This  led  to  the  Elite  Conscription  Act  of  1996  and  the  most
elitely conscripted army in the history of warfare.
So  here  we  were,  ﬁfty  men  and  ﬁfty  women,  with  IQs  over  150  and
bodies of unusual health and strength, slogging elitely through the mud
and  slush  of  central   Missouri,   reﬂecting  on  the  usefulness  of  our  skill
in  building  bridges   on  worlds   where   the   only  ﬂuid  is   an  occasional
standing pool of liquid helium.
The  Forever  War
  11
3
About  a  month  later,  we  left  for  our  ﬁnal  training  exercise,  maneuvers
on the planet Charon. Though nearing perihelion, it was still more than
twice as far from the sun as Pluto.
The   troopship  was   a   converted   ‘cattlewagon’   made   to   carry   two
hundred  colonists  and  assorted  bushes  and  beasts.   Don’t  think  it  was
roomy,   though,   just  because  there  were  half  that  many  of  us.   Most  of
the excess space was taken up with extra reaction mass and ordnance.
The  whole  trip  took  three  weeks,   accelerating  at   two  gees  halfway,
decelerating  the other half. Our top speed, as we roared by the orbit of
Pluto,   was   around  one-twentieth  of   the   speed  of   light   –   not   quite
enough for relativity to rear its complicated head.
Three weeks of carrying around twice as much weight as normal   .   .   .
it’s  no  picnic.   We  did  some  cautious  exercises  three  times  a  day  and
remained  horizontal   as  much  as  possible.   Still,   we  got  several   broken
bones and serious dislocations. The men had to wear special supporters
to   keep   from  littering   the   ﬂoor   with   loose   organs.   It   was   almost
impossible  to  sleep;   nightmares  of  choking  and  being  crushed,   rolling
over periodically to prevent blood pooling and bedsores. One girl got so
fatigued  that   she  almost   slept   through  the  experience  of   having  a  rib
push out into the open air.
I’d  been  in  space  several   times   before,   so  when  we  ﬁnally  stopped
decelerating  and went into  free fall, it was nothing  but relief. But some
people  had  never  been  out,   except  for  our  training  on  the  Moon,   and
succumbed  to  the  sudden  vertigo  and  disorientation.   The  rest   of   us
cleaned  up  after  them,  ﬂoating  through  the  quarters  with  sponges  and
inspirators   to  suck   up  the   globules   of   partly-digested  ‘Concentrate,
High-protein, Low-residue, Beef Flavor (Soya).’
We  had  a  good  view  of   Charon,   coming  down  from  orbit.   There
wasn’t  much  to  see,  though.  It  was  just  a  dim,  off-white  sphere  with  a
few smudges on it. We landed about two hundred meters from the base.
A  pressurized  crawler  came  out  and  mated  with  the  ferry,  so  we didn’t
have  to  suit  up.   We  clanked  and  squeaked  up  to  the  main  building,   a
featureless box of grayish plastic.
Inside,  the  walls  were  the  same  drab  color.  The  rest  of  the  company
was sitting at desks, chattering away. There was a seat next to Freeland.
‘Jeff – feeling better?’ He still looked a little pale.
‘If the gods had meant for man to survive in free fall, they would have
given  him  a  cast  iron  glottis.’  He  sighed  heavily.  ‘A  little  better.  Dying
for a smoke.’
‘Yeah.’
‘You seemed to take it all right. Went up in school, didn’t you?’
‘Senior thesis in vacuum welding, yeah. Three weeks in Earth orbit.’ I
sat  back  and  reached  for  my  weed  box  for  the  thousandth  time.  It  still
wasn’t there. The Life-Support Unit didn’t want to handle nicotine and
THC.
‘Training was bad enough,’ Jeff groused, ‘but this shit—’
‘Tench-hut!’   We   stood  up  in  a   raggedy-ass   fashion,   by   twos   and
threes. The door opened and a full major came in. I stiffened a little. He
was  the  highest-ranking  ofﬁcer  I’d  ever  seen.  He  had  a  row  of  ribbons
stitched  into  his  coveralls,  including  a  purple  strip  meaning  he’d  been
wounded  in  combat,   ﬁghting  in  the  old  American  army.   Must   have
been that Indochina thing, but it had ﬁzzled out before I was born. He
didn’t look that old.
‘Sit,   sit.’  He  made  a  patting  motion  with  his  hand.   Then  he  put  his
hands on his hips and scanned the company, a small smile  on his  face.
‘Welcome to Charon. You picked a lovely day to land, the temperature
outside is a summery  eight  point one  ﬁve  degrees  Absolute.  We  expect
little  change  for  the  next  two  centuries  or  so.’   Some  of  them  laughed
halfheartedly.
‘Best you enjoy the tropical climate here at Miami Base; enjoy it while
you  came.   We’re   on  the   center   of   sunside   here,   and  most   of   your
training  will  be  on  darkside.  Over  there,  the  temperature  stays  a  chilly
two point zero eight.
‘You  might  as  well  regard  all  the  training  you  got  on  Earth  and  the
Moon as just an elementary exercise, designed to give you a fair chance
of   surviving  Charon.   You’ll   have  to  go  through  your  whole  repertory
here: tools, weapons, maneuvers. And you’ll ﬁnd that, at these tempera-
tures, tools don’t work the way they should; weapons don’t want to ﬁre.
And people move v-e-r-y cautiously.’
He studied the clipboard in his hand. ‘Right now, you have forty-nine
The  Forever  War
  13
women   and   forty-eight   men.   Two   deaths   on   Earth,   on   psychiatric
release.   Having  read  an  outline  of  your  training  program,   I’m  frankly
surprised that so many of you pulled through.
‘But  you  might  as  well   know  that  I  won’t  be  displeased  if  as  few  as
ﬁfty of you, half, graduate from this ﬁnal phase. And the only way not to
graduate  is  to  die.   Here.   The  only  way  anybody  gets  back  to  Earth  –
including me – is after a combat tour.
‘You  will  complete  your  training  in  one  month.  From  here  you  will
go  to  Stargate  collapsar,   half   a  light   year   away.   You  will   stay  at   the
settlement   on  Stargate  1,   the  largest   portal   planet,   until   replacements
arrive. Hopefully, that will be no more than a month; another group is
due here as soon as you leave.
‘When you leave Stargate, you will go to some strategically important
collapsar, set up  a military base  there, and  ﬁght the  enemy, if  attacked.
Otherwise, you will maintain the base until further orders.
‘The   last   two  weeks   of   your   training   will   consist   of   constructing
exactly that kind of a base, on darkside. There you will be totally isolated
from  Miami   Base:   no   communication,   no   medical   evacuation,   no
resupply. Sometime before the two weeks are up, your defense facilities
will be evaluated in an attack by guided drones. They will be armed.’
They had spent all that money on us just to kill us in training?
‘All of the permanent personnel here on Charon are combat veterans.
Thus, all of us are forty to ﬁfty years of age. But I think we can keep up
with  you.   Two  of  us  will  be  with  you  at  all  times  and  will  accompany
you  at   least   as  far  as  Stargate.   They  are  Captain  Sherman  Stott,   your
company commander, and Sergeant Octavio Cortez, your ﬁrst sergeant.
Gentlemen?’
Two men in the front row stood easily and turned to face us. Captain
Stott  was  a  little  smaller  than  the  major,  but  cut  from  the  same  mold:
face  hard  and  smooth  as  porcelain,   cynical   half-smile,   a  precise  centi-
meter of beard framing a large chin, looking thirty at the most. He wore
a large, gunpowder-type pistol on his hip.
Sergeant   Cortez   was   another   story,   a   horror   story.   His   head  was
shaved  and  the  wrong  shape,   ﬂattened  out  on  one  side,   where  a  large
piece of skull had obviously been taken out. His face was very dark and
seamed  with  wrinkles  and  scars.   Half  his  left  ear  was  missing,   and  his
eyes were as expressive  as buttons on a machine.  He had a  moustache-
and-beard   combination   that   looked   like   a   skinny   white   caterpillar
taking  a  lap  around  his  mouth.   On  anybody  else,   his  schoolboy  smile
Peace  and  War
14
might   look  pleasant,   but   he   was   about   the   ugliest,   meanest-looking
creature  I’d  ever   seen.   Still,   if   you  didn’t   look  at   his   head  and  con-
sidered  the   lower   six   feet   or   so,   he   could  have   posed  as   the   ‘after’
advertisement  for  a  body-building  spa.   Neither  Stott  nor  Cortez  wore
any  ribbons.   Cortez  had  a  small  pocket-laser  suspended  in  a  magnetic
rig, sideways, under his left armpit. It had wooden grips that were worn
smooth.
‘Now,   before   I   turn  you  over   to  the   tender   mercies   of   these   two
gentlemen, let me caution you again:
‘Two months ago there was not a living soul on this planet, just some
leftover   equipment   from  the  expedition  of   1991.   A  working  force  of
forty-ﬁve men struggled for a month to erect this base. Twenty-four of
them,   more  than  half,   died  in  the  construction  of  it.   This  is  the  most
dangerous planet men have ever tried to live on, but the places you’ll be
going  will  be  this  bad  and  worse.  Your  cadre  will  try  to  keep  you  alive
for the next month. Listen to them  .   .   . and follow their example; all of
them have survived here much longer than you’ll have to. Captain?’ The
captain stood up as the major went out the door.
‘Tench-hut !’ The last syllable was like an explosion and we all jerked
to our feet.
‘Now  I’m  only  gonna  say  this  once  so  you  better  listen,’  he  growled.
‘We  are  in  a  combat  situation  here,  and  in  a  combat  situation  there  is
only  one  penalty  for  disobedience  or  insubordination.’   He  jerked  the
pistol from his hip and held it by the barrel, like a club. ‘This is an Army
model   1911   automatic   pistol,   caliber   .45,   and   it   is   a   primitive   but
effective weapon. The Sergeant and I are authorized to use our weapons
to  kill   to  enforce  discipline.   Don’t  make  us  do  it  because  we  will.   We
will.’ He put the pistol back. The holster snap made a loud crack in the
dead quiet.
‘Sergeant  Cortez  and  I  between  us  have  killed  more  people  than  are
sitting in this room. Both of us fought in Vietnam on the American side
and  both  of   us  joined  the  United  Nations   International   Guard  more
than ten years ago. I took a break in grade from major for the privilege
of  commanding  this  company,  and  First  Sergeant  Cortez  took  a  break
from sub-major, because we are both combat soldiers and this is the ﬁrst
combat situation since 1987.
‘Keep  in  mind  what  I’ve  said  while  the  First  Sergeant  instructs  you
more speciﬁcally in what your duties will be under this command. Take
over, Sergeant.’ He turned on his heel and strode out of the room. The
The  Forever  War
  15
expression on his face hadn’t changed one millimeter during the whole
harangue.
The   First   Sergeant   moved  like   a   heavy   machine   with  lots   of   ball
bearings. When the door hissed shut, he swiveled ponderously to face us
and  said,  ‘At  ease,  siddown,’  in  a  surprisingly  gentle  voice.  He  sat  on  a
table in the front of the room. It creaked, but held.
‘Now the captain talks scary and I look scary, but we both mean well.
You’ll be working pretty closely with me, so you better get used to this
thing I’ve got hanging in front of my brain. You probably won’t see the
captain much, except on maneuvers.’
He  touched  the  ﬂat  part  of  his  head.  ‘And  speaking  of  brains,   I  still
have  just  about  all  of  mine,  in  spite  of  Chinese  efforts  to  the  contrary.
All of us old vets who mustered into UNEF had to pass the same criteria
that got you drafted by the Elite Conscription Act. So I suspect all of you
are smart and tough – but just keep  in mind that  the captain and I are
smart and tough and experienced.’
He  ﬂipped  through  the  roster  without  really  looking  at  it.   ‘Now,   as
the   captain  said,   there’ll   be   only  one   kind  of   disciplinary  action  on
maneuvers. Capital punishment. But normally we won’t have to kill you
for disobeying; Charon’ll save us the trouble.
‘Back in the billeting area, it’ll be another story. We don’t much care
what   you  do  inside.   Grab  ass   all   day   and  fuck  all   night,   makes   no
difference  .   .   .  But  once  you  suit  up  and  go  outside,  you’ve  gotta  have
discipline that would shame a Centurian. There will be situations where
one stupid act could kill us all.
‘Anyhow,   the   ﬁrst   thing   we’ve   gotta   do  is   get   you  ﬁtted  to  your
ﬁghting suits. The armorer’s waiting at your billet; he’ll take you one at
a time. Let’s go.’
Peace  and  War
16
4
‘Now I know you got lectured back on Earth on what a ﬁghting suit can
do.’   The  armorer  was  a  small   man,   partially  bald,   with  no  insignia  of
rank on his coveralls. Sergeant Cortez had told us to call him ‘sir,’ since
he was a lieutenant.
‘But  I’d  like  to  reinforce  a  couple  of  points,  maybe  add  some  things
your  instructors  Earthside  weren’t  clear  about  or  couldn’t  know.  Your
First   Sergeant   was   kind  enough  to  consent   to  being   my   visual   aid.
Sergeant?’
Cortez  slipped  out   of   his  coveralls  and  came  up  to  the  little  raised
platform  where  a  ﬁghting  suit  was  standing,  popped  open  like  a  man-
shaped  clam.   He   backed  into  it   and  slipped  his   arms   into  the   rigid
sleeves.  There  was  a  click  and  the  thing  swung  shut  with  a  sigh.  It  was
bright green with CORTEZ  stenciled in white letters on the helmet.
‘Camouﬂage,   Sergeant.’   The  green  faded  to  white,   then  dirty  gray.
‘This  is  good  camouﬂage  for  Charon  and  most  of  your  portal  planets,’
said  Cortez,   as  if   from  a  deep  well.   ‘But   there  are  several   other  com-
binations available.’ The gray dappled and brightened to a combination
of   greens   and  browns:   ‘Jungle.’   Then  smoothed  out   to  a   hard  light
ochre:   ‘Desert.’   Dark  brown,   darker,   to  a   deep  ﬂat   black:   ‘Night   or
space.’
‘Very good, Sergeant. To my knowledge, this is the only feature of the
suit  that  was  perfected  after  your  training.  The  control  is  around  your
left   wrist   and   is   admittedly   awkward.   But   once   you  ﬁnd   the   right
combination, it’s easy to lock in.
‘Now, you didn’t get much in-suit training Earthside. We didn’t want
you  to  get   used  to  using   the   thing   in  a   friendly   environment.   The
ﬁghting  suit   is  the  deadliest  personal   weapon  ever  built,   and  with  no
weapon is it easier for the user to kill himself through carelessness. Turn
around, Sergeant.’
‘Case  in  point.’  He  tapped  a  large  square  protuberance  between  the
shoulders.   ‘Exhaust  ﬁns.   As  you  know,   the  suit  tries  to  keep  you  at  a
comfortable temperature no matter what the weather’s like outside. The
material   of   the  suit   is  as   near  to  a  perfect   insulator  as   we  could  get,
consistent   with  mechanical   demands.   Therefore,   these   ﬁns   get   hot   –
especially  hot,   compared  to  darkside  temperatures  –  as  they  bleed  off
the body’s heat.
‘All you have to do is lean up against a boulder of frozen gas; there’s
lots of it around. The gas will sublime off faster than it can escape from
the  ﬁns;   in  escaping,   it   will   push  against   the  surrounding  ‘‘ice’’   and
fracture  it  .   .   .   and  in  about  one-hundredth  of  a  second,   you  have  the
equivalent   of   a  hand  grenade  going  off   right   below  your  neck.   You’ll
never feel a thing.
‘Variations  on  this  theme  have  killed  eleven  people  in  the  past  two
months. And they were just building a bunch of huts.
‘I assume you know how easily the waldo capabilities can kill you or
your companions. Anybody want to shake hands with the sergeant?’ He
paused,   then  stepped  over   and  clasped  his   glove.   ‘He’s   had  lots   of
practice.   Until   you  have,   be  extremely  careful.   You  might   scratch  an
itch  and  wind  up  breaking   your   back.   Remember,   semi-logarithmic
response: two pounds’ pressure exerts ﬁve pounds’ force; three pounds’
gives ten; four pounds’, twenty-three; ﬁve pounds’, forty-seven. Most of
you can muster up a grip of well over a hundred pounds. Theoretically,
you could rip a steel girder in two with that, ampliﬁed. Actually, you’d
destroy  the  material   of   your  gloves  and,   at   least   on  Charon,   die  very
quickly. It’d be a race between decompression and ﬂash-freezing. You’d
die no matter which won.
‘The leg waldos are also dangerous, even though the ampliﬁcation is
less   extreme.   Until   you’re   really   skilled,   don’t   try   to  run,   or   jump.
You’re likely to trip, and that means you’re likely to die.’
‘Charon’s gravity is three-fourths of Earth normal, so it’s not too bad.
But  on  a  really  small  world,  like  Luna,  you  could  take  a  running  jump
and  not   come   down  for   twenty   minutes,   just   keep  sailing   over   the
horizon. Maybe bash into a mountain at eighty meters per second. On a
small asteroid, it’d be no trick at all to run up to escape velocity and be
off on an informal tour of intergalactic space. It’s a slow way to travel.
‘Tomorrow morning, we’ll start teaching you how to stay alive inside
this infernal machine. The rest of the afternoon and evening, I’ll call you
one at a time to be ﬁtted. That’s all, Sergeant.’
Cortez went to the door and turned the stopcock that let air into the
airlock.   A  bank  of   infrared  lamps  went   on  to  keep  air  from  freezing
Peace  and  War
18
inside   it.   When  the   pressures   were   equalized,   he   shut   the   stopcock,
unclamped  the  door  and  stepped  in,   clamping  it   shut  behind  him.   A
pump  hummed  for   about   a  minute,   evacuating  the  airlock,   then  he
stepped out and sealed the outside door.
It was pretty much like the ones on Luna.
‘First I want Private Omar Almizar. The rest of you can go ﬁnd your
bunks. I’ll call you over the squawker.’
‘Alphabetical order, sir?’
‘Yep.   About   ten  minutes   apiece.   If   your   name  begins   with  Z,   you
might as well get sacked.’
That was Rogers. She probably was thinking about getting sacked.
The  Forever  War
  19
5
The  sun  was  a  hard  white  point  directly  overhead.  It was  a  lot brighter
than I had expected  it to be; since  we were eighty AUs out, it was only
one  6400th as  bright as  it  is  on  Earth.  Still,  it  was  putting  out  about  as
much light as a powerful streetlamp.
‘This  is  considerably  more  light  than  you’ll  have  on  a  portal  planet.’
Captain  Stott’s  voice  crackled  in  our  collective  ear.  ‘Be  glad  that  you’ll
be able to watch your step.’
We  were  lined  up,   single-ﬁle,   on  the  permaplast  sidewalk  that  con-
nected  the  billet  and  the  supply  hut.  We’d  practiced  walking  inside, all
morning,   and  this   wasn’t   any  different   except   for  the  exotic  scenery.
Though  the   light   was   rather   dim,   you  could  see   all   the   way   to  the
horizon quite clearly, with no atmosphere in the way. A black cliff that
looked  too  regular   to  be   natural   stretched  from  one   horizon  to  the
other, passing within a kilometer of us. The ground was obsidian-black,
mottled with patches of white or bluish ice. Next to the supply hut was a
small mountain of snow in a bin marked oxygen.
The  suit   was  fairly  comfortable,   but   it   gave  you  the  odd  feeling  of
simultaneously   being   a   marionette   and  a   puppeteer.   You  apply   the
impulse to move  your  leg  and the suit  picks it up and  magniﬁes  it and
moves your leg for you.
‘Today   we’re   only   going   to  walk   around  the   company   area,   and
nobody  will   leave  the  company  area.’   The  captain  wasn’t   wearing  his
.45 – unless he carried it as a good  luck charm,  under his  suit – but he
had a laser-ﬁnger like the rest of us. And his was probably hooked up.
Keeping  an  interval   of  at  least  two  meters  between  each  person,   we
stepped off the permaplast and followed the captain over smooth rock.
We   walked   carefully   for   about   an   hour,   spiraling   out,   and   ﬁnally
stopped at the far edge of the perimeter.
‘Now everybody pay close attention. I’m going out to that blue slab of
ice’   –  it   was   a  big  one,   about   twenty  meters   away  –  ‘and  show  you
something that you’d better know if you want to stay alive.’
He  walked  out  in  a  dozen  conﬁdent  steps.  ‘First  I  have  to  heat  up  a
rock – ﬁlters down.’ I squeezed the stud under my armpit and the ﬁlter
slid into place over my image converter. The captain pointed his ﬁnger
at  a  black  rock  the  size  of  a  basketball,   and  gave  it  a  short  burst.   The
glare rolled a long shadow of the captain over us and beyond. The rock
shattered into a pile of hazy splinters.
‘It doesn’t take long for these to cool down.’ He stopped and picked
up a piece. ‘This one is probably twenty or twenty-ﬁve degrees. Watch.’
He  tossed  the  ‘warm’   rock  onto  the  ice  slab.   It   skittered  around  in  a
crazy pattern and shot off the side. He tossed another one, and it did the
same.
‘As  you  know,   you  are  not  quite  perfectly  insulated.  These  rocks  are
about the temperature of the soles of your boots. If you try to stand on a
slab  of   hydrogen,   the  same  thing  will   happen  to  you.   Except   that  the
rock is already dead.
‘The  reason  for  this  behavior  is  that  the  rock  makes  a  slick  interface
with  the   ice   –  a   little   puddle   of   liquid  hydrogen  –  and  rides   a   few
molecules above the liquid on a cushion of hydrogen vapor. This makes
the rock or you  a frictionless bearing as far as the ice is concerned, and
you can’t stand up without any friction under your boots.
‘After you have lived in your suit for a month or so you should be able
to  survive  falling  down,   but   right   now  you  just   don’t   know  enough.
Watch.’
The  captain  ﬂexed  and  hopped  up  onto  the  slab.   His  feet  shot  out
from under him and he twisted around in midair, landing on hands and
knees. He slipped off and stood on the ground.
‘The  idea  is  to  keep  your  exhaust  ﬁns  from  making contact  with  the
frozen  gas.  Compared  to  the  ice  they  are  as  hot  as  a  blast  furnace,  and
contact with any weight behind it will result in an explosion.’
After  that  demonstration,  we  walked  around  for  another  hour  or  so
and  returned  to  the  billet.   Once  through  the  airlock,   we  had  to  mill
around  for   a  while,   letting  the   suits   get   up  to  something  like   room
temperature. Somebody came up and touched helmets with me.
‘William?’ She had mccoy  stenciled above her face-plate.
‘Hi, Sean. Anything special?’
‘I just wondered if you had anyone to sleep with tonight.’
That’s   right;   I’d  forgotten.   There   wasn’t   any   sleeping  roster   here.
Everybody   chose   his   own  partner.   ‘Sure,   I   mean,   uh,   no  .   .   .   no,   I
haven’t asked anybody. Sure, if you want to  .   .   .’
The  Forever  War
  21
‘Thanks,   William.   See   you   later.’   I   watched   her   walk   away   and
thought   that   if   anybody  could  make  a  ﬁghting  suit   look  sexy,   it’d  be
Sean. But even she couldn’t.
Cortez  decided  we  were  warm  enough  and  led  us  to  the  suit  room,
where   we   backed  the   things   into  place   and  hooked  them  up  to  the
charging  plates.  (Each  suit  had  a  little  chunk  of  plutonium  that  would
power it for several  years,  but we were  supposed  to run on fuel  cells as
much as possible.) After a lot of shufﬂing around, everybody ﬁnally got
plugged  in  and  we  were  allowed  to  unsuit  –  ninety-seven  naked  chick-
ens  squirming  out  of  bright  green  eggs.  It  was  cold  –  the  air,   the  ﬂoor
and  especially  the  suits  –  and  we  made  a  pretty  disorderly  exit  toward
the lockers.
I slipped on tunic, trousers and sandals and was still cold. I took my
cup and joined the line for soya. Everybody was jumping up and down
to keep warm.
‘How c-cold, do you think, it is, M-Mandella?’ That was McCoy.
‘I don’t, even want, to think, about it.’ I stopped jumping and rubbed
myself as briskly as possible, while holding a cup in one hand. ‘At least
as cold as Missouri was.’
‘Ung  .   .   . wish they’d, get some, fucken, heat in, this place.’ It always
affects the small women more than anybody else. McCoy was the littlest
one in the company, a waspwaist doll barely ﬁve feet high.
‘They’ve got the airco going. It can’t be long now.’
‘I wish I, was a big, slab of, meat like, you.’
I was glad she wasn’t.
Peace  and  War
22
